---
layout: "unit"
title: "88.01.02: The Constitution, Censorship and the Schools: Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes"
path: "/curriculum/units/1988/1/88.01.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Constitution, Censorship and the Schools: Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes"
unitAuthor: "Peter Neal Herndon"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 88.01.02:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Narrative
</li>
<li>
Introduction
</li>
<li>
I.Unit Objectives
</li>
<li>
II.  Unit Summary and Strategies
</li>
<li>
II. Day Two:  July 13 (Monday)
</li>
<li>
III. Day Three: July 14 (Tuesday)
</li>
<li>
IV.Day Four: July 15 (Wednesday)
</li>
<li>
V. Day Five: July 16 (Thursday)
</li>
<li>
VI. Day Six: July 17 (Friday)
</li>
<li>
VII.Day Seven:  July 20 (Monday)
</li>
<li>
VIII. Day Eight:  July 21 (Tuesday)
</li>
<li>
Scopes Case:  Issues for Debate
</li>
<li>
III.Sample Lesson Plans
</li>
<li>
Lesson Two:  The Scopes Trial:  Issues and Answers
</li>
<li>
Lesson Three:"Inherit the Wind" (Film on Videocassette)
</li>
<li>
Student Worksheet
</li>
<li>
Appendix
</li>
<li>
Annotated Bibliography
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/1988/1/88.01.02.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
"The world is to be carried forward by truth, which at first offends,
<p>
which wins its way by degrees, which the many hate and would
</p>
<p>
rejoice to crush."
</p>
<p>
- William Ellery Channing, 1849
</p>
<p>
"When we consider what religion is for mankind, and what science is,
</p>
<p>
it is no exaggeration to say that the future course of history depends
</p>
<p>
upon the decision of this generation as to the relations between
</p>
<p>
them."
</p>
<p>
- Alfred North Whitehead, 1930
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Introduction
</h2>
Teachers in the New Haven high schools have used this unit in the 
Law Course offered to seniors, and to juniors taking United States 
History. I am aware of at least one ninth-grade teacher who has 
excerpted parts of this unit for use in teaching principles of the U.S. 
Constitution. Apparently, the materials contained here are readily 
adaptable for a variety of interest and ability levels. 
This teaching unit explores an issue which should be of great interest 
to both students and professional educators: intellectual freedom.  
What are the legal boundaries of what may and what may not be 
taught in public schools?  What is the constitutional nature of this 
question?  Besides educators, there are many individuals and groups 
which have input into the schools: students, parents, and local and 
state Boards of Education.
Who ultimately has the right to determine what is and what is not 
permitted to be taught? How often have courts (particularly the 
Supreme Court) ruled in cases involving teachers' right to teach and 
students' right to know? The United States claims to be a pluralistic 
society in which the rights of minorities are protected. Under law, 
how does a school system act to indeed protect the rights of 
minorities within a framework of intellectual freedom and the "right 
to know"?  One of the underlying purposes of this unit is to examine 
ways of effecting possible changes in schools within the boundaries 
of the U.S. Constitution. 
First, students will examine the issues underlying the famous case 
that involved a Tennessee science teacher named John Scopes who 
violated a state law in 1925 that forbid the teaching of Darwin's 
theory of evolution.  The issues of this famous trial will provide the 
main part of my teaching unit. In this case, famous expert lawyers 
(in this case the defense had Clarence Darrow plus two other civil 
rights attorneys who were paid for by the American Civil Liberties 
Union in New York), came to the defense of a "notorious" defendant. 
The drama of this case was heightened by the presence of three-time 
Presidential candidate and religious leader, William Jennings Bryan, 
who took the witness stand in a defense of Bible truth and in 
opposition to evolutionary teaching. The famous "monkey trial" is 
history, with Scopes' penalty a small fine. 
However, issues of censorship in the classroom are very much 
contemporary.  In 1987 (Edwards v. Aguillard) the Supreme Court 
struck down a Louisiana law requiring that creationism be taught 
together with the theory of evolution. By debating the issues 
themselves, students should become more aware that what may or 
may not be appropriate to learn about in public school classrooms 
can be a highly controversial subject. How are such decisions arrived 
at?  What about the dissenters (whether they be judges, parents, 
teachers or students)? 
There are additional cases related to issues raised in the Scopes trial 
which can be considered as well. What happens when parents object 
to a New York Board of Education's attempt to remove certain books 
from the library at the request of other parents (Board of Education 
v. Pico, 1982)? Nine books were actually removed from a high school 
library because they were considered morally and/or politically 
objectionable.  Was this allowed under the Constitution?  Students 
might consider some of the titles and content of these books and 
deliver their own "verdicts".  Also, what happens if family-religious 
values conflict with state school requirements (as in Yoder v. 
Wisconsin, 1971) when Amish families objected to their children 
remaining in school until the age of sixteen? 
In 1988, near St. Louis, a high school principal censored the school 
newspaper, and removed articles about teenage pregnancy, birth 
control and the impact of divorce on children (Hazelwood School 
District v. Kuhlmeier). Was this allowed under the U.S. Constitution? 
Students who have participated in this issue-oriented debate over 
curriculum in the public schools have had their awareness 
heightened and their interests kindled. They have learned that 
Constitutional issues may affect them personally, discussion of issues 
can be quite emotional, and that court decisions may not satisfy 
everyone.
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="2"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
I.Unit Objectives
</h2>
This unit of study contains certain basic concepts associated with the 
topic which students will be expected to understand and use:
<h3>
Student Vocabulary List
</h3>
The following is a list of concepts and ideas students should be 
familiar with after having completed this unit of study:
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
American Civil Liberties Union
<dt>
adjourn
<dt>
amicus curiae
<dt>
appeal (Appellate Court)
<dt>
arrest
<dt>
Attorney General
<dt>
bail
<dt>
balanced treatment act
<dt>
bill
<dt>
Butler Act
<dt>
case
<dt>
checks and balances
<dt>
civil law
<dt>
counsel
<dt>
court record: off the record
<dt>
court record: on the record
<dt>
constitutionality (of laws)
<dt>
conviction
<dt>
creation-science
<dt>
criminal law
<dt>
cross-examination
<dt>
Darwinism
<dt>
defendant
<dt>
defense
<dt>
dissenting opinion
<dt>
Edwards v. Aguillard  (1987)
<dt>
evidence
<dt>
evolutionary theory
<dt>
exception (in court)
<dt>
felony
<dt>
fine (by jury or court)
<dt>
fundamentalism
<dt>
Genesis
<dt>
grand jury
<dt>
impartial
<dt>
indictment
<dt>
jury selection
<dt>
justice
<dt>
lawsuit
<dt>
legislation
<dt>
legislature:lower house
<dt>
legislature: senate
<dt>
litigation
<dt>
McLean v. Arkansas (1982)
<dt>
misdemeanor
<dt>
mistrial
<dt>
motions (by counsel)
<dt>
motions: overruled
<dt>
motions: sustained
<dt>
offense
<dt>
plea
<dt>
peremptory challenge
<dt>
preliminary hearing
<dt>
prohibit
<dt>
prosecution
<dt>
repeal (a law)
<dt>
sentence: maximum
<dt>
sentence: minimum
<dt>
separation of church and state
<dt>
separation of powers
<dt>
state's case
<dt>
statute
<dt>
Tennessee v. John Scopes(1925)
<dt>
test case
<dt>
trial by jury
<dt>
violation (of law)
<dt>
warrant
<dt>
witness
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
During this prepared unit of study, students will be assigned to 
carefully examine court records, testimonies of witnesses and court 
opinions in an effort to involve them in the legal process and how it 
operates. They will follow a bill from its inception to its challenge in 
court, right through to the appeals stage. 
This unit has challenged students to develop and use certain critical 
thinking skills.  Students can, if the teacher so desires, become 
involved in several learning activities that will challenge them to 
read factual evidence carefully and analyze this evidence in ways 
that will enable them to become more coherent thinkers and writers.  
By debating legal issues with their classmates, students learn to 
improve speaking and listening skills, as well as small group process 
skills. In summary, students who complete this unit of study will 
have been exposed to methods which are intended to improve their 
abilities to decipher, interpret, organize and communicate 
information more effectively. 
In addition to skill-building, students will become familiar with 
terminology relating to law and the courtroom. Students will be 
expected to keep lists of vocabulary words and concepts within their 
groups. Glossaries are available for them to consult. Independent 
research is encouraged.  The teacher hands out specific questions to 
answer based on group readings to help students accurately 
summarize facts.
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="3"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
II.  Unit Summary and Strategies
</h2>
To introduce the unit to the students, I have taken information from 
a 1981 court case, McClean v. Arkansas, which challenged a 
"balanced treatment" law allowing Creation-Science and Evolution-
Science to be taught in Arkansas' public school classrooms.  On Day 
One of the unit, I introduce a role play involving an imaginary 
biology teacher.  This science teacher is required by law to teach 
Darwin's theory of evolution to his students.  He does not believe that 
evolution should be taught all by itself, without a "balanced 
treatment" given to the Bible-Creation explanation, a belief both he 
and many of his students share.  But there is nothing mentioned in 
the science textbook about Bible-Creation, only evolution. His 
principal warns him to "stick to the textbook."  He is not sure what to 
do.  He has four alternatives: (1) teach evolution only; (2) teach Bible 
creation only; (3) teach both; (4) teach neither. 
Following a discussion of the issues and after having been given a 
"Fact Sheet" on both Creation-Science and Evolution-science, (see 
Lesson Plan section below) students are put into discussion groups 
with the purpose of preparing a recommendation to the "School 
Board."  After hearing the recommendations, the Board will 
recommend a policy to be followed in all science classes.  This 
activity is geared toward familiarizing students with concepts such as 
"balanced treatment," evolution and creation-science, but, more 
importantly, for them to see that many ideas for laws and litigation 
arise out of ordinary experiences. 
The next class period, after hearing from the "School Board," we learn 
that a "Balanced Treatment" Act has been challenged in court and has 
been struck down. Students will then hear the court's reasons, which 
relate to First Amendment protections against establishment of a 
religion.  Is this censorship?  Students will be encouraged to discuss 
their views on forms of censorship carried on in public schools and 
the "reasonable limits" of such censorship. Who has the right to 
censor?  Can policies and laws be challenged? If so, how?  This 
should lead us into our assignment for the next several days, the 
issues surrounding the case of Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes, the 
so-called "monkey trial" held in Dayton, Tennessee in July, 1925, in 
which a science teacher was arrested for teaching evolution in 
violation of the state laws at that time.
<h3>
Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes
</h3>
For the next five to six class periods the students will study the 
famous case as a way of understanding the legal process.  To begin, 
we will examine the bill presented by Tennessee representative John 
Washington Butler.  Butler was a second-term legislator and was 
concerned about reports that the teachings of Charles Darwin's 
theory of evolution in Tennessee schools was causing disbelief in the 
Biblical account of creation among young people. 
Why had Butler sponsored such a bill?  Butler firmly believed that:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
"In the first place, the Bible is the foundation upon which our
<p>
American Government is built...The evolutionist who denies the bible
</p>
<p>
story of creation, as well as other Biblical accounts...robs the Christian
</p>
<p>
of His hope and undermines the foundation of our Government."
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
(Quoted in Ginger, Six Days or Forever?, 4)
</font>
</blockquote>
The bill was referred to committee, and was passed by the lower 
house by a vote of 71 to 5.
Then it was the senate's turn.  The bill in the senate was promoted, 
among others, by former Secretary of State and three-time 
Presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, who would later 
participate as a special prosecutor in the Scopes trial a few months 
later.  Bryan had helped successfully to sponsor an anti-evolution bill 
which had become law in Florida two years earlier.  Bryan's view 
was that evolution, if taught, should be recognized for what it was, a 
series of educated guesses.
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
Bunch of out copy
</font>
</i>
</center>
The Senate passed the bill with little opposition by a vote of 24 to 6, 
exactly as written by John Butler. (See Appendix, Document 1.)  Eight 
days later, Governor Austin Peay signed the bill into law, fully 
expecting that the law would not effectively change science teaching 
in Tennessee. (Appendix, Document 2.)  The Butler anti-evolution Act 
was now law.  Would it be enforced?  Would there be a test case?  
Tennessee and the world did not have long to wait for an answer.
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="4"}}
<h3>
The Defendant: John Thomas Scopes
</h3>
According to John Scopes, he agreed to stand trial as a result of a 
drugstore discussion that got out of hand. More than one observer 
has concluded he was snared into it by those seeking publicity for 
their hometown of Dayton. A mining engineer named George 
Rappelyea, a native New Yorker, had been reading in the newspaper 
that the American Civil Liberties Union in New York was willing to 
supply a defense team of distinguished lawyers to handle a test case 
of the recently passed anti-evolution law in Tennessee, the Butler 
Act. Rappleyea thought immediately of Dayton's new science teacher 
and football coach, Scopes. Two days later, a meeting was arranged 
after school at F.E. Robinson's drugstore, and during the debate over 
evolution, Scopes admitted that he did not see how it would be 
possible to teach biology without mentioning Charles Darwin's theory.  
In fact, he said, the Tennessee-approved textbook, used in Dayton, 
Hunter's Civic Biology, contained a chapter on the evolution of man 
and Darwin's theory of natural selection.
Scopes admitted he was opposed to the Tennessee anti-evolution law 
because he did not think that the state should tell all the Tennessee 
schools what could and could not be taught, that was a matter for a 
local or county school board, not the state.  After some more 
discussion, Scopes agreed to be arrested; and on May 10, 1925, he 
was given a preliminary hearing before three judges.  It was charged 
that he had taught the theory of evolution to his class on April 24 
from Hunter's Civic Biology textbook, which contained sentences such 
as:  "We have now learned that animal forms may be arranged so as 
to begin with the simple one-celled forms and culminate with a 
group which contains man himself." (Appendix, Document 4)  A 
grand jury was scheduled to meet to formally indict Scopes.  Bond 
was set at $1,000, and was paid by Robinson and Rappelyea.  The 
grand jury met on July 10, one month earlier than scheduled, just to 
make sure that Dayton would get the test case publicity. 
Meanwhile, Scopes had been invited to New York City to meet with 
the A.C.L.U. to choose counsel and plan legal strategy. Scopes was 
very pleased that  the famous trial lawyer Clarence Darrow had 
volunteered his services for this case.  Assistance would be given by 
Dudley Field Malone and Arthur Garfield Hays, two other well-known 
attorneys.  Three other lawyers represented Scopes, including a 
Tennessee law professor John R. Neal, who was placed in charge of 
the case.
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
About 2 pages of out copy
</font>
</i>
</center>
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="5"}}
<h3>
The Trial Itself
</h3>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
I.
</td>
<td>
Day One:  July 10 (Friday)
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
1 paragraph of out copy
</font>
</i>
</center>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Court was called to order promptly at 9:00 A.M. by Judge John T. 
Raulston. The defendant, John T. Scopes was there with his six 
attorneys, including Darrow and two other lawyers, Malone and Hays, 
from outside of Tennessee. They were introduced to the court by the 
chief counsel, Mr. John Neal. The prosecution was represented by A.T. 
Stewart, the attorney-general. Ben Mckenzie, McKenzie's son Gordon, 
and five other lawyers, including William Jennings Bryan. Bryan, it 
should be noted, had a special interest in this case, since he had 
helped to draft Tennessee's anti-evolution bill.  He was a staunch 
defender of fundamental Bible beliefs.  More than one hundred 
reporters and two from London, England, sat at the press tables.  The 
courtroom was bulging with over four hundred spectators who lined 
the walls.  The judge asked that the session be opened with prayer, 
as he did throughout the trial.
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
About 2 lines of out copy
</font>
</i>
</center>
A new indictment of Scopes had to be handed down, since the first 
indictment was done so hurriedly on May 25.  Quickly, the first order 
of the court was to impanel a new grand jury and read them the 
anti-evolution statute that Scopes allegedly had violated. (Appendix, 
Document 1)
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
1 paragraph of out copy.  Too much more to mark.
</font>
</i>
</center>
He then read from Genesis, Chapter One, containing the divine story 
of creation in the Bible.  "And God created man in his own image, in 
the image of God created He them, male and female, created He 
them." (Appendix, Document 3)
The judge went on to explain that the issue before the grand jury 
was not the wisdom of the Butler Act, but whether there had been a 
violation of it.  If so, after an impartial examination of evidence 
(three of Scopes' students had to be rounded up in order to give 
statements to the jury), it was found that the teacher broke the law, 
then it was their duty to return a report to the judge so stating. By 
11 A.M. the grand jury returned an indictment. Now at last the case 
of Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes, No. 5232, could begin. 
Before the selection of jury members for the trial to begin, Darrow 
wanted to know if and when his scientists were going to be able to 
testify for the defense.  This question was a major issue before the 
court:  Could the defense try to prove in the trial that the theory of 
evolution was a valid scientific proposition, and that it did not 
necessarily negate the teachings of the Bible? Or would the scope of 
the case be narrowed to the simple violation of the Butler Act?
Judge Raulston then ordered the selection of jury members to begin, 
even though a jury pool of only sixteen men was present. Darrow 
was shocked that the judge expected the jury to be impaneled in one 
afternoon; why there were times when two hundred venireman and 
several weeks were needed to select a satisfactory jury. 
The jury selection process which followed was quite fascinating.  And 
it was complete by the end of the afternoon, much to everyone's 
surprise.  In order for students to more completely understand this 
segment of courtroom procedures, students may participate in a role 
play, where potential jurors are interviewed by the defense and 
prosecution attorneys, each with varying viewpoints toward either 
evolution or the Bible.  In this way, with role-playing attorneys given 
only two peremptory challenges, the students will heighten their 
awareness not only of how jury selection works but also the issues at 
stake in the Scopes case. (Appendix, Document 7) 
After accepting the first and second jurors, Darrow interviewed an 
ex-miner now a farmer, Jim Riley.  Darrow inquired as to whether he 
had ever talked to anyone about evolution or heard any sermons 
about it. Riley said no.
DARROW:Ever hear Mr. Bryan speak about it? 
RILEY:No, sir.
DARROW:Ever read anything he said about it?
RILEY:No, sir; I can't read. 
DARROW:Well, you are fortunate. (Laughter) 
(Quoted in Ginger, 98)
Riley was accepted, along with eight other farmers; two were 
landowners, and one a shipping clerk. 
During the questioning, Darrow revealed that his strategy was to 
contend that evolution did not necessarily contradict Genesis, and 
therefore under the wording of the Butler Act, establish that his 
client, Scopes, may only have partially broken the law:  the part that 
said it was forbidden to teach, "any theory that man has descended 
from a lower order of animals."  According to the defense motion, 
Scopes would have to commit two separate acts to be fully guilty 
under the law, the other act being that, "any theory that denies the 
story of the Divine Creation as taught in the Bible", is illegal.  Was 
this the lawmakers' original intent, or just legal "hairsplitting?"  The 
court would have to rule on this motion (See Day Four of the trial).
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="6"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
II. Day Two:  July 13 (Monday)
</h2>
Court was delayed for a few minutes so that the radio microphones 
could be adjusted.  Judge Raulston commented proudly, "My gavel 
will be heard 'round the world."  After prayer, attorney-general 
Stewart read the indictment against Scopes, followed by defense 
attorney Neal's motion to quash the indictment.
The prosecution argued 1) that freedom of religion applied only to 
worship in churches, and 2) that it had been established by the U.S. 
Supreme Court (Meyer v. Nebraska) recently that a legislature had 
power to control public school curriculum.  To the prosecution it was 
a simple matter:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
B. MCKENZIE:  Under the laws of the land, the constitution of
<p>
Tennessee, no particular religion can be taught in the schools.  We
</p>
<p>
cannot teach any religion in the schools, therefore you cannot teach
</p>
<p>
any evolution, or any doctrine that conflicts with the Bible.  That sets
</p>
<p>
them up exactly equal...
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
As to the clarity of the statute: (McKenzie continued)
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
Under the law you cannot teach in the common schools the Bible.
<p>
Why should it be improper to provide that you cannot teach this
</p>
<p>
other theory? (Grebstein, 57)
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
Was evolution, then, to be construed as a set of "religious beliefs?"  
This same question would recur fifty years later in similar cases 
argued before the United States Supreme Court. (See "Two Modern 
Cases" below)
After the prosecution made its major point, that is, that the state has 
a duly constituted authority and legal responsibility to prescribe the 
curriculum for the public schools, Darrow got his chance to reply.  His 
sarcasm was evident:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
As hard as it is for me to bring my mind to conceive it, almost
<p>
impossible as it is to put my mind back into the sixteenth century, I
</p>
<p>
am going to argue it as if it was serious, and as if it was a death
</p>
<p>
struggle between two civilizations. (Grebstein, 60)
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
He was finished, and court adjourned for the day. 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="7"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
III. Day Three: July 14 (Tuesday)
</h2>
After a third straight day of opening court with prayer, Darrow 
opened another assault on the court, demanding that prayer be 
removed from the courtroom, since the case pitted science against 
religion and this might prove an undue influence on the jury.  Judge 
Raulston ruled that prayers would not unduly influence him or the 
jury, so the prayers would continue.
Was it science versus religion?  Academic freedom versus the right 
of the state to standardize the curriculum?  A simple matter of a 
state law being violated by a high school science teacher? The judge 
refused to rule on these matters until the next court session.  
Everyone was getting impatient, especially the jury members, who 
had been barred from the courtroom for two days. When, if ever, 
would they be allowed to hear the arguments that would decide the 
fate of John Scopes? 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="8"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
IV.Day Four: July 15 (Wednesday)
</h2>
It took the judge an hour to read his 6,000-word statement denying 
the defense motion, stating that the intent and wording of the Butler 
Act was clear, that the state had a constitutional right to determine 
what was (and what was not) taught in the public schools, and any 
teacher who wanted to teach evolution was free to teach it in the 
private schools or elsewhere. Furthermore the Butler Act did not 
force religious beliefs on anyone.  Sobeit.  The court had spoken.  
A rousing victory for the prosecution.  The trial would proceed. The 
jury would be sworn in. 
After a recess until 1 P.M., the court was to hear the only testimony 
that became part of the official court record, even though the trial 
would last eight days.
After the plea of Not Guilty was entered by the defense, a brief 
statement followed by the attorney-general, Mr. Stewart, stating that 
Scopes had violated the state law by teaching that man had 
descended from,"a Lower order of animals." 
With the jury still not present, Mr. Malone gave the defense's 
opening statement in which he maintained: (1) there was no direct 
conflict between the theory of evolution and the theories of creation 
in Genesis; (2) stories of creation in Genesis were not scientifically 
correct.
After the jury was seated, Howard Morgan, fourteen, and one of 
Scopes' science students, testified that his teacher had taught that 
man was a mammal and that life gradually had evolved from the sea.  
A sample of the cross-examination by Darrow: 
Q:He didn't say a cat was the same as a man? 
A:No sir; he said man had a reasoning power; that these animals did 
not.
Q:There is some doubt about that, but that is what he said, is it?...
Q:Well, did he tell you anything else that was 'wicked'?
A:No, not that I remember of. 
This exchange caused even members of the prosecution to grin. 
Q:Now, that is about what he taught you. It has not hurt you any, has 
it?
A:No, sir. 
(Grebstein, 102, 103, 105)
After hearing from another of Scopes' students, Harry Shelton, the 
prosecution called F.E. Robinson, the school board member who had 
ordered the biology books used by Scopes.  Darrow, in cross-
examination, established that Scopes' textbook, was indeed approved 
by the state.
Darrow then read to the jury from the textbook the reasons why man 
was classified with the vertebrates, then the mammals, then with the 
apelike mammals.  Not to be outdone, Stewart read into the record 
the first two chapters of Genesis.  Balanced treatment.  The state's 
case was officially over; Bryan had not even made a statement!
The defense began its case after being allowed to swear in ten 
witnesses, nine of them distinguished scientists, all scheduled to 
testify as to the validity of evolution.  The first witness sworn in was 
Dr. Maynard Metcalf, a zoologist, author and member of a 
Congregationalist church. 
Was evolution a fact, he was asked?
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
The whole plan of evolution...seen so clearly in the universe as a
<p>
whole, makes a tremendous probability in favor of the evolution of
</p>
<p>
man (italics added). (Grebstein, 115)
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
Scientists, Metcalf insisted, disagreed that the evolution process was 
a "fact," but he doubted "the truth of any hypothesis--as to the 
methods of the evolution which this or that or the other man--even 
great men of science--might bring up." Inconclusive testimony at 
best.  As it turned out, it was the only testimony on evolution the 
jury was to hear, from a scientist, at least. 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="9"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
V. Day Five: July 16 (Thursday)
</h2>
After prayer, the question before the court was this: whether to 
uphold the state's motion to exclude all scientific experts testimony 
on the truth or the falsity of evolution.  W. J. Bryan, Jr., made the 
point that expert testimony would be only opinion, not fact. 
According to the state, since Scopes had taught that man had 
descended from a lower order of animals, he had denied the Bible's 
account of Creation.  After lunch, William Jennings Bryan made his 
first speech. For an hour he warned of the evils of evolution and the 
truth of the Bible.  And what of the children? 
BRYAN: Why, my friends, if they believe it, they go back to scoff at 
the religion of their parents:  And the parents have a right to say 
that no teacher paid by their money shall rob their children of faith 
in God and send them back to their homes, skeptical, infidels, 
agnostics or atheists. (Grebstein, 127)
After a short recess, Malone made a long emotional speech to the 
court, in which he made an impassioned appeal (1) to recognize the 
Bible as a book on religion not science; (2) to realize there is no major 
conflict between Bible creation and evolution; (3) conclude that the 
truth could only be known if scientific testimony were allowed.  On 
this last point Malone pleaded: "Is our only weapon--the witnesses 
who shall testify to the accuracy of our theory--Is our only weapon 
to be taken from us, so that the duel will be entirely one-sided?" 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="10"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
VI. Day Six: July 17 (Friday)
</h2>
In perhaps the most dramatic statement yet made at the trial, Judge 
Raulston revealed that his thinking had remained unchanged. "It is 
not within the province of the court under these issues to decide and 
determine which is true, the story of divine creation as taught in the 
Bible, or the story of the creation of man as taught by evolution."  No 
experts were needed to comprehend the simple language of the law; 
no scientific testimony would be heard.  The result: pandemonium in 
the courtroom.  When order had been restored, the two sides bristled 
at each other. A sample follows: 
HAYS:We say that it is a denial of justice not to permit the Defense to 
make its case on its own theory.
COURT:Let the exception be entered of record. 
STEWART:I desire to except to exceptions made in that manner...I 
think it is a (poor) reflection on the Court... 
COURT:Always expect this Court to rule correctly.
DARROW:No sir, we do not. (Laughter) 
COURT:I suppose you anticipated it? (my ruling)
DARROW:Otherwise we should not be taking our exceptions here, 
your Honor. We expect to protect our rights in some other Court.  
Now that is plain enough, isn't it?...I do not understand why every 
request of the State and every suggestion of the Prosecution should 
meet with an endless amount of time, and a bare suggestion of 
anything that is perfectly competent on our part should be 
immediately over-ruled. 
COURT:I hope you do not mean to reflect upon the Court?     
DARROW:Well, your Honor has the right to hope.  (Grebstein, 137)
Raulston was clearly angered and said to Darrow: "I have a right to 
do something else, perhaps."  The crowd waited to see if the Judge 
would send Darrow to jail for contempt.  But the Court did nothing.  
Instead he adjourned the court until Monday. 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="11"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
VII.Day Seven:  July 20 (Monday)
</h2>
Monday's session began abruptly.  Judge Raulston immediately cited 
Darrow for contempt of court for remarks expressed on Friday to the 
court that were "contemptuous and insulting." 
After lunch, Darrow made a statement to the court apologizing for his 
ill-mannered remarks on Friday.  The Judge, in the name of Christ, 
forgave Darrow and accepted his apology with these words, "we 
forgive him and we forget it, and we commend him to go back home 
and learn in his heart the words of the Man who said: 'If you thirst 
come unto Me and I will give thee life.'" (Quoted in Grebstein, 143)  
The courtroom applauded, as they had Darrow when he had finished 
his remarks.  At this point, Judge Raulston announced that cracks had 
developed in the ceiling beneath the courtroom.  He was fearful that 
the building would collapse, so he ordered court to convene outdoors 
for the afternoon session.  The evidence by scientists continued to be 
read into the record (approximately 35,000 words altogether from 
seven scientists). 
Next, the Judge agreed to have a large sign saying "READ YOUR 
BIBLE" removed from the courthouse, near where the absent jury 
was scheduled to sit.  Again the judge wanted to appear as "fair" as 
he could. 
Then, the surprise move by the Defense came:  they wanted to call 
William Jennings Bryan as a witness, an expert witness on the Bible!  
The judge hesitated, the Prosecution objected, but Bryan seemed 
afraid not to. How could he refuse to give battle?  He looked to the 
Judge to save him, but Raulston seemed to welcome the opportunity, 
giving Bryan permission to call Darrow to the witness stand as well.  
That opportunity was to be denied Bryan, however. And Darrow was 
to have the opportunity he had been waiting for since the trial 
began--to attempt to make a "monkey" out of Bryan. 
Throughout the questioning, Darrow relentlessly pointed to miracles 
that, he said, could not have happened in a scientifically ordered 
world. Bryan replied, "One miracle is just as easy to believe as 
another."  Darrow was frustrated at Bryan's refusal to give exact 
answers.  He got angrier. 
DARROW:What do you think? 
BRYAN:I could not say. 
DARROW:(Was the estimate of the time of the flood figured out) from 
the generations of man? 
BRYAN:I would not want to say that.
DARROW:What do you think? 
BRYAN:I do not think about things I don't think about. 
DARROW:Do you think about things you do think about? 
BRYAN:Well, sometimes. (Grebstein, 151)
At this even the judge joined in the laughter.  And despite objections 
for the questioning to stop, Bryan remained, insisting that the 
defense had "no other purpose than ridiculing every Christian who 
believes in the Bible."  Darrow's response to Bryan: "We have the 
purpose of preventing bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the 
education of the United States and you know it--and that is all."
Bryan's final retort:  "I am simply trying to protect the word of God 
against the greatest atheist or agnostic in the United States.  
(prolonged applause from the crowd) I want the papers to know I 
am not afraid to get on the stand in front of him and let him do his 
worst." (Grebstein, 164)
The questions continued. More arguing.  Bryan did admit that the 
"days" in Genesis, he thought were "periods of time" not necessarily 
literal twenty-four hour days, but he "would not attempt to argue 
against anybody who wanted to believe in literal days." 
The testimony, which had lasted for over an hour and a half, was the 
"event" everyone had hoped for.  The questioning ended with both 
men trading insults, and Bryan, obviously exhausted and trembling, 
was still willing to continue until Darrow was satisfied. 
BRYAN:I want the world to know that this man, who does not believe 
in a God, is trying to use a court in Tennessee--. 
DARROW:I object to that. 
BRYAN:(continuing) to slur at it, and while it will require time, I am 
willing to take it. 
DARROW:I object to your statement. I am examining you on your fool 
ideas that no intelligent Christian on earth believes.  (Grebstein, 
169,170)
Darrow had the final slap in the face. Court was adjourned until 9 
A.M. Tuesday. 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="12"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
VIII. Day Eight:  July 21 (Tuesday)
</h2>
The Judge announced that Mr. Bryan's testimony the previous day 
would have no relevance to deciding the case either in this court or 
the appeals court, so therefore he was eliminating it from the court 
record.  The jury would not consider it as evidence. 
The jury was brought in for the first time in days, and Darrow read 
his charge to the jury, saying that this case could only be settled in a 
higher court, "and it cannot get to a higher court unless you bring in 
a (guilty) verdict." He was telling the jury he wanted them to find the 
defendant, Scopes, guilty! 
Raulston explained that the fine, if the jury found Scopes guilty, 
should be set by the judge, unless they wanted to impose a fine of 
more than $100.00; otherwise they could just find the defendant 
guilty "and leave the punishment to the court." 
The jury retired for awhile and after nine full minutes returned with 
a verdict.  Guilty. They left the matter of a fine to the court.  The 
defendant, Scopes, silent throughout the trial, rose to face the judge, 
who imposed the minimum $100.00 fine. Finally, Scopes was allowed 
to make a brief statement:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
SCOPES:Your Honor, I feel that I have been convicted of violating an
<p>
unjust statute.  I will continue in the future, as I have in the past, to
</p>
<p>
oppose this law in any way I can. Any other action would be in
</p>
<p>
violation of my ideal of academic freedom -- that is, to teach the
</p>
<p>
truth as guaranteed in our constitution, of personal and religious
</p>
<p>
freedom.  I think the fine is unjust. (Grebstein, 176)
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
The judge then allowed some closing remarks from the various 
participants.  The attorneys remarked on the hospitality of the judge, 
and the people of Tennessee; everyone seemed gracious and in good 
spirits. Even Darrow, humorously thanked the judge for his kind 
treatment in not having sent him to jail.  Bryan gave a brief 
summary of the trial's significance:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
BRYAN:Here has been fought out a little case of little consequence as
<p>
a case, but the world is interested because it raises an issue, and that
</p>
<p>
issue will some day be settled right, whether it is settled on our side
</p>
<p>
or the other side...
</p>
<p>
The people will determine the issue. They will take sides upon this
</p>
<p>
issue; they will examine the information...and the facts will be
</p>
<p>
known, and upon the facts, the decision will be rendered...No matter
</p>
<p>
what our views may be, we ought not only desire, but pray, that that
</p>
<p>
which is right will prevail, whether it be our way or somebody
</p>
<p>
else's...
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
The judge put it this way:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
THE COURT:  Now my friends, the man...who is big enough to search
<p>
for the truth and find it, and declares it in the face of all opposition is
</p>
<p>
a big man...Now, my friends, the people in America are a great
</p>
<p>
people. We are great because we are willing to lay down our
</p>
<p>
differences when we fight the battle out and be friends. (Grebstein,
</p>
<p>
178, 180)
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
Following the benediction, the court was adjourned. 
Finally, there was an appeal to the Tennessee Supreme Court, heard 
six months later, and argued by the same A.C.L.U.-sponsored lawyers 
for Scopes.  Obviously, Bryan could not participate, since he had died 
on July 26, 1925, five days after the trial ended. 
In his ruling, seven months later, on January 14, 1926, Chief Justice 
Green claimed that the Butler Act was clear in its meaning and intent 
and that it, indeed, was constitutionally valid. As for Scopes, due to 
Judge Raulston's setting of Scopes' fine rather than the jury, the 
verdict was reversed on a legal technicality. No further appeal was 
possible because of the judge's error, so the case was thrown out of 
court.  Motions for a new hearing were denied. One justice of the 
court dissented from the majority ruling because he felt the Butler 
Act was vague and unclear and should have been struck down for 
that reason.
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="13"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
Scopes Case:  Issues for Debate
</h2>
What was the significance of Dayton, Tennessee, July, 1925? Was it a 
carnival? A rural sideshow? An anachronism?  Or, as one observer 
put it, was it "a great historic guidepost on the road to emancipation 
in the search for truth?" (Tompkins, ed., D-Days at Dayton, 63)
Who won the Scopes case?  There were, of course, differing opinions. 
An Oklahoma paper declared:  "Mr. Bryan came out more than 
victorious.  He made a monkey out of the defense counsel and left 
them gasping."  In Little Rock, Arkansas, the Gazette reported, "For 
the state of Tennessee the Scopes trial has been a moral disaster.  It 
will plague the citizen of Tennessee wherever he may go."  Dudley 
Malone, the Defense attorney, said the trial had been a "victorious 
defeat."  Students, having read and discussed most of the testimony 
of the trial, will be assigned to debate orally one of three positions on 
the following resolution:
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
"RESOLVED, that the Scopes trial was a clear victory for the Anti-
<p>
Evolutionists."
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
The three positions will be the Affirmative (agrees with the 
resolution), the Negative (disagrees with the resolution), and the 
Middle Position (sees elements of victory for both sides).  From the 
very beginning of the Scopes case, students should know which 
position they will be defending, and should be gathering "evidence" 
for their point of view.
Following the classroom debate, students should view the film 
"Inherit the Wind" (videocassette available through the Institute 
office or your local Video store) in whole or in part, for the students' 
critical analysis (See Appendix for "Student Worksheet"). If time 
permits only one class period, begin showing from Day Seven of the 
trial, the day that Bryan takes the stand, the obvious climax of the 
film.  Students should note how the film differs from historical fact 
and try to determine why the playwriters did so. Was the film in any 
way "biased" for or against either side in the case?  Good insights 
should be gained from this class activity and critical thinking skills 
sharpened. 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="14"}}
<h3>
Two Modern Cases
</h3>
To wrap up the unit, a discussion of issues in two modern cases 
brings the issues in controversy into the present.  In McClean v. 
Arkansas (1982) the U.S. District Court decided to strike down, on 
constitutional grounds the Arkansas "Balanced Treatment Act" (Act 
590) enacted by the General Assembly in March, 1981. The Act 
stated:
<center>
<i>
<font size="-1">
This is an example of where the paragraph is not separated  with 2 hard returns (starts with Treatment pg 52)
</font>
</i>
</center>
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
Balanced treatment shall be given in the public schools within this
<p>
State...to the extent that (teaching methods) deal in any way with the
</p>
<p>
subject of the origin of man, life, the earth, or the universe.
</p>
<p>
Treatment of either evolution-science or creation-science shall be
</p>
<p>
limited to scientific evidence for each model...and must not include
</p>
<p>
any religious instruction or references to religious writings...
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
Further the act required "instruction in both scientific models if 
public schools choose to teach either." (italics added) 
The emphasis appeared to be toward offering students the benefit of 
two models:  "This legislature enacts this Act for public schools with 
the purpose of protecting academic freedom for students' differing 
values and beliefs...This legislature does not have the purpose of 
causing instruction in religious concepts or making an establishment 
of religion." (Quoted in LaFollette, ed., Creationism, Science and the 
Law, 15,16,17)
Nevertheless, with all its apparently "good motives," the Arkansas 
"Balanced Treatment Act" was struck down as an attempt to bring 
"religious instruction into the classroom."  The court's conclusion in a 
lengthy decision and after months of testimony, concluded that "The 
First Amendment principles are not determined by public opinion or 
by a majority vote...No group, ... may use the organs of government, 
of which the public schools are the most conspicuous and influential, 
to foist its religious beliefs on others." (Quoted in LaFollette, 72)  
Despite the gains at respectability made by creation-scientists, this 
decision had a devastating effect on their credibility.  The question 
troubling many non-scientific laymen remains:  Isn't the court, by 
prohibiting creation-science from the classroom, exercising a form of 
censorship which denies students and teachers "academic freedom?" 
These issues surfaced again, this time in Louisiana, with a court 
challenge to its 1981 "Balanced Treatment Instruction Act." This 
time, the appeal went all the way to the top of the Judicial ladder.  
The U.S. Supreme Court decided, in June, 1987, by a vote of 7 to 2, to 
strike down the Louisiana statute.  Edwards v. Aguillard featured a 
high school science teacher, who, along with parents and other 
colleagues, won victories in two lower federal courts before the big 
victory in Washington, D.C.
And so, another round has been fought in the science v. religion 
controversy.  Will there be a next round?  Some, in 1925, didn't think 
so, but they were proven wrong.  Can religion and science be 
reconciled in certain areas?  Do they have to "agree to disagree" in 
others?
A scientist who testified in the Scopes trial brought the issue forward 
this way:
"Neither the right kind of mind (scientific) nor the right kind of heart 
(religious) will suffice without the other. Both are needed if 
civilization is to be saved." (Quoted in Tompkins, ed., 167)
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="15"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
III.Sample Lesson Plans
</h2>
Lesson One:Freedom to Teach, Freedom to Learn? (Two Days)
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objectives
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. To involve students in the contemporary debate over
<dt>
academic freedom v. censorship in public schools;
<dt>
2. To acquaint students with the concept of "balanced treatment;"
<dt>
3. To allow students to explore possible solutions to conflicting ideas
<dt>
and beliefs; particularly those that affect students in schools.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Procedures
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.The classroom teacher introduces a dilemma (Day One)
<dt>
to the class: that of a high school biology teacher who believes that
<dt>
his students should know that there are two possible explanations to
<dt>
the origins of the universe and of plant and animal life. However,
<dt>
only one, evolution, is discussed in the textbook. The principal tells
<dt>
him to "teach what's in the book--period." He is troubled by this and
<dt>
believes he has a good case, since many of his students and their
<dt>
parents are persuaded that "Creation-Science" should also be taught,
<dt>
alongside of "Evolution- Science".  He decides to take it to the Board
<dt>
of Education meeting for them to decide.
<dt>
<dt>
2.Students are divided into three groups.  Each is given a "FACT
<dt>
SHEET" (below). g The three groups discuss among themselves what
<dt>
they will present to the Board members tomorrow.  The alternatives
<dt>
are:
<dt>
(1) teach evolution only (the textbook);
<dt>
(2) teach creation-science only (ignore the textbook);
<dt>
(3) teach both evolution and creation-science.
<dt>
<dt>
3.The teacher should answer questions about various terms, but
<dt>
remember that this exercise is one in problem-solving; the technical
<dt>
difficulties of this issue as a legal problem will be discussed later.
<dt>
<dt>
4.If there is time, tentative conclusions may be shared among the
<dt>
entire class.
<dt>
<dt>
5.Assignment: Poll at least five adults on this issue and be prepared
<dt>
to report findings tomorrow.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Lesson One
</b>
</i>
"FACT SHEET": Evolution-Science and Creation-Science
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Directions
</b>
</i>
After reading this "Fact Sheet," discuss in your group your
</i>
</b>
<br/>
recommendations to the Board of Education.  What should students 
study in science class?
<i>
<b>
Evolution-Science
</b>
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.The earth is millions, perhaps billions of years old; it has to be that
<dt>
old in order for the slow evolutionary changes to take place;
<dt>
2.The universe at first was in a state of disorder and non-living
<dt>
material; it has evolved (changed) over millions of years into one of
<dt>
order and life has emerged from non-life;
<dt>
3.Life in early stages was simple; the present living kinds have
<dt>
developed from processes known as "mutation" and "natural
<dt>
selection;"
<dt>
4.Man has emerged from an ancestor common to apes;
<dt>
5.Reliance on rocks and the fossil record to show that later species
<dt>
are related to earlier species, now no longer living (extinct).
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Creation-Science
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.The earth is relatively recent; its age can be measured in thousands
<dt>
of years;
<dt>
2.The universe was created suddenly, energy and life came from
<dt>
nothing (there was no pre-existing matter prior to "creation");
<dt>
3.Basic changes have not occurred in animal and plant kinds, only
<dt>
within certain limits;
<dt>
4.Separate ancestry of man and apes;
<dt>
5.Explanation of the earth's rock and fossil record by catastrophic
<dt>
events, including worldwide flood;
<dt>
6.Denial that "mutation" and "natural selection" can explain the great
<dt>
variety in plant and animal kinds from a single organism.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Arguments
</b>
</i>
Evolution v. Creation-Science
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.Creation-Science is a religious belief and therefore cannot be
<dt>
introduced in public schools because the Constitution forbids the
<dt>
government to pass laws which promote particular religion.
<dt>
2.Creation-Science advances beliefs from Genesis in the Bible.
<dt>
3.Creation-Science is really religion and not science.
<dt>
4.Creation-Science would force students to make a false choice
<dt>
between "religion" and "science", keep religion out of science classes.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Arguments
</b>
</i>
Creation-Science v. Evolution (for "balanced treatment")
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.Creation-Science's purpose is to deal with the issues of origins of
<dt>
life on a scientific basis, with no references to the Bible or religious
<dt>
doctrine.
<dt>
2.The universe is very complex and orderly: could it all just have
<dt>
happened, without the outside power and plan of a Creator?
<dt>
3.Evolution is merely a theory;since there are only two possible
<dt>
explanations for the origins of the universe and life on earth, why
<dt>
not expose the students to both, rather than one explanation?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<h3>
Sources:
</h3>
Montagu, Ashley, Science and Creationism
LaFollette, Marcel, Creationism, Science and the Law
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="16"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
Lesson Two:  The Scopes Trial:  Issues and Answers
</h2>
<i>
<b>
Objectives
</b>
</i>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.To familiarize students with issues of law, particularly
<dt>
the issue of First Amendment rights and how they may or may not
<dt>
pertain to the classroom situation;
<dt>
2.To become more aware of actual courtroom procedures and
<dt>
terminology (e.g., cross-examination, grand jury, indictment, etc.);
<dt>
3.To sift through the issues present in the Scopes case;
<dt>
4.To try to understand why some court cases receive so much
<dt>
publicity and others do not;
<dt>
5.To involve students in the processes of courts through role plays,
<dt>
mock interviews and film.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Procedures
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.As students read the actual day-to-day happenings of
<dt>
the case (see above), certain "KEY QUESTIONS" should be referred to
<dt>
(below) and have students prepare answers ahead of time for
<dt>
discussion in class.
<dt>
2.Issues discussed: Examine the DOCUMENTS (found in the Appendix)
<dt>
One and Two, to try to get students to understand what the Butler
<dt>
Act really said (Is it clear?) and what the Governor said about it.
<dt>
What is the students' opinion of the law? (This law is actually still on
<dt>
the books in Tennessee; an attempt to repeal it in 1951 was
<dt>
defeated) Who in 1925 would be happy about such a law?  Who
<dt>
would be unhappy? What could a science teacher do about such a
<dt>
law? What if he or she broke the law?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Assignment:Examine DOCUMENTS 3 and 4.(see Appendix)  What 
conflicts, if any, do you see in these two pieces of historical evidence? 
Why would people criticize either one?
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Procedures
</b>
</i>
(Day Two)
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.After discussing issues raised by last night's assignment,focus on
<dt>
the person John Scopes (Read selection in class provided in unit
<dt>
above).  Have students discuss who he was, what he believed in, how
<dt>
it all happened that he became the defendant in a famous trial. How
<dt>
do the students react?  Would they want to be Scopes?  Why or why
<dt>
not?
<dt>
2.Next hand out DOCUMENTS 5 and 6 (see Appendix), edited
<dt>
documents from the First Day of the trial.  Notice all the names of
<dt>
attorneys. How does court open? What does this tell you?  Read
<dt>
carefully what the judge says to the grand jury members.  If you
<dt>
were a member of the grand jury, how would you decide? Why?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Assignment:Examine DOCUMENT 7 to prepare for tomorrow's class, a 
Role-Play (optional) in selecting a jury for the Scopes trial: 
interviewing potential jury members. Question (DOCUMENT 7): Would 
you have done what the Defense Attorney, Darrow, did at the end of 
this interview (he rejected the jury member)? Explain.
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Procedures
</b>
</i>
(Trial Questions)
</i>
</b>
<br/>
As students read the selected information about the trial, be aware 
of issues and terminology which will help students understand and 
appreciate the world-wide attention this trial was getting in the 
media.  How might they have "covered" the trial? What kinds of 
stories might they have written? 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="17"}}
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Lesson Three:"Inherit the Wind" (Film on Videocassette)
</h2>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objectives
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.To observe, in dramatized form, the issues brought out
<dt>
by the Scopes case;
<dt>
2.To encourage students (as a test of their knowledge of facts about
<dt>
Scopes) to differentiate between historical fact and dramatic fiction;
<dt>
3.To look for bias on the part of those writing or producing the
<dt>
movie.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Procedures:
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.Before viewing the film, explain that names have been
<dt>
changed to fictitious ones:
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>

</td>
<td>
William J.Bryan (Matthew Harrison Brady)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

</td>
<td>
Clarence Darrow (Henry Drummond)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

</td>
<td>
John Scopes (Bert Cates)
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
2.Hand out "Student Worksheet" (included in unit) for students to use
<dt>
as they watch the film
<dt>
3. Note: If time allows you to show part of the film only, then start
<dt>
with the beginning of the Seventh Day of the trial, which features the
<dt>
interrogation of Brady (Bryan) by Drummond (Darrow).
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Student Worksheet
</h2>
<h3>
"Inherit the Wind"
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Introduction
</i>
</p>
<p>
Now that we have studied the issues and personalities in the famous 
Scopes case, we will view a dramatization of this trial. As in the 
Scopes case the defendant (Bert Cates) is arrested for violating the 
state law that made it a crime to teach any theory that contradicts 
the Bible.  The defendant is represented by a famous trial lawyer 
(Henry Drummond) from Chicago, a religious agnostic.  Another of the 
defense supporters is a journalist (E.V. Hornbeck), who does not take 
the trial seriously at all. The minister's daughter (Rachel Brown), who 
is the defendant's fiancee, is called as a prosecution witness in the 
trial by the prosecution attorney (Matthew Harrison Brady).  Brady is 
a former candidate for President, a Bible expert and a supporter of 
conservative views and the "common man."
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Questions
</i>
</p>
<p>
As we view the film, be prepared to discuss the following:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.The journalist Hornbeck describes the trial as the "Persecution of
<dt>
the educated." What do you think he meant by this statement? Do
<dt>
you agree or disagree with his opinion?
<dt>
<dt>
2.What role did the media play in the trial (both newspapers and
<dt>
radio). Compare this to the role of the media (tv included) in recent
<dt>
trials or Congressional hearings. Why was this trial a "media event"?
<dt>
<dt>
3.Comment on the statement made by the defense lawyer
<dt>
Drummond, "Right has no meaning to me whatsoever. Truth has
<dt>
meaning as a direction." What does he mean by this difference?
<dt>
<dt>
4.What is the meaning of the Bible verse which has provided the
<dt>
film's title, found in Proverbs 11:29?  "He that troubleth his own
<dt>
house shall inherit the wind; and the fool shall be servant to the wise
<dt>
of heart." How can it be applied to the dramatic events?
<dt>
<dt>
5.How is the word "evolution" used in explaining change?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Worksheet--Page 2
<p>
<i>
Observation Questions
</i>
</p>
<p>
The authors of the play,  Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee, insist 
their play "is not history."  Try to correct the fictious parts of the 
play as you remember them from your study of the Scopes trial.  
Complete the chart below (add others): 
Fiction:Fact:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Bert Cates is arrested and drag-
<dt>
ged from his classroom, led by the minister and the mayor.
<dt>
<dt>
2. Henry Drummond stands alone in his defense of Bert Cates.
<dt>
<dt>
3. E.V. Hornbeck's newspaper, the Baltimore Herald, arranges for
<dt>
Henry Drummond to defend Cates and pay all legal fees.
<dt>
<dt>
4. Testimony by all scientific      experts is completely ignored by
<dt>
the judge.
<dt>
<dt>
5. Other observations you may have noticed:
<dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
THOUGHT QUESTION: Why change the facts at all?  What purposes 
might the authors have in mind in altering the historical facts of the 
case? 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="18"}}
<hr/>
<h2>
APPENDIX
</h2>
Teaching Materials Useful in teaching Scopes
DOCUMENT 1: The Butler Act, 1925:
Section 1.Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of 
Tennessee, That it shall be unlawful for any teacher in any of the 
Universities, Normals (high schools) and all other public schools of 
the State...to teach any theory that denies the story of the Divine 
Creation of man as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man 
has descended from a lower order of animals. 
Section 2.Be it further enacted, that any teacher found guilty of the 
violation of this Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon 
conviction, shall be fined not less than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars 
nor more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars for each offense... 
(Grebstein, 3)
DOCUMENT 2:Governor Austin Peay's special message to Tennessee 
legislature, March 21, 1925: (excerpts)
After a careful examination I can find nothing of consequence in the 
books now being taught in our schools with which the bill will 
interfere in the slightest manner.  Therefore, it will not put our 
teachers in any jeopardy (legal danger).  Probably the law will never 
be applied.  It may not be sufficiently definite to permit of any 
specific application or enforcement.  Nobody believes that it is going 
to be an active statute... (quoted in Ginger, 7)
DOCUMENT 3:Excerpts from Genesis, chapter one: 
"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth..." (v. 1) 
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and 
let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every 
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. (v. 26) 
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he 
him; male and female created he them. (v. 27) 
And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very 
good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day. (v. 31) 
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and 
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had 
made."(Chapter 2, verse 2) 
DOCUMENT 4:Excerpts from George W. Hunter, A Civic Biology. 
The Doctrine of Evolution. We have now learned that animal forms 
may be arranged so as to begin with very simple one-celled forms 
and culminate with a group which contains man himself. This 
arrangement is called the evolutionary series. Evolution means 
change, and these groups are believed by scientists to represent 
stages in complexity of development of life on the earth.  Geology 
teaches that millions of years ago, life upon the earth was very 
simple, and that gradually more and more complex forms of life 
appeared, as the rocks formed late in time show the most highly 
developed forms of animal life. The great English scientist Charles 
Darwin, from this and other evidence, explained the theory of 
evolution. This is the belief that simple forms of life on the earth 
slowly and gradually gave rise to those more complex and that thus 
ultimately the most complex forms came into existence. (page 194 of 
text)
Man's Place in Nature. If we attempt to classify man, we see at once 
he must be placed with the vertebrate animals because of his 
possession of a vertebral column. Evidently, too, he is a mammal, 
because the young are nourished by milk secreted by the mother 
and because his body has at least a partial covering of hair... We 
must place him with the apelike mammals, because of these 
numerous points of structural likeness.  The groups of mammals 
which includes the monkeys, apes and man we call the "primates." 
Monkeys certainly seem to have many of the mental attributes of 
man...(and therefore) the monkey justifies his inclusion with man in 
a separate mental genus." (page 195 of text)
(Grebstein, 28)
DOCUMENT 5:Dayton, Tennessee, Friday, July 10, 1925
State of Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes
Nos. 5231, 5232
In the Circuit Court of Rhea County, Tennessee
Hon. J. T. Raulston, Judge
Counsel for the State Counsel for the Defendant
A.T. Stewart, Attorney General John R. Neal
William J. Bryan               Clarence Darrow
William J. Bryan, Jr.         Dudley Field Malone
B. G. McKenzie                   Arthur G. Hays
J. G. McKenzie                  W.O. Thompson
H. E. Hicks 
W. C. Haggard
FIRST DAY
THE COURT:The court will come to order. The Reverend Cartwright 
will please open court with prayer. 
THE REV. CARTWRIGHT:We beseech Thee, our Heavenly Father, that 
Thou will grant unto every individual that share of wisdom that will 
enable them to go out from this session of the court, with the 
consciousness of having under God and grace done the very best 
thing possible, and the wisesth thing possible... Hear us in our 
prayers, our Father, this morning, for the cause of truth and 
righteousness... that the affairs of church and state may be so 
administered that God may beget unto Himself the greatest degree of 
honor and glory. 
THE COURT:Seat everyone you can, Mr. Sheriff, and those that can't 
get seats, let them stand around the wall. 
THE COURT:Mr. Attorney General, come right up here, please. let me 
have my docket, Mr. Clerk. 
9:22 A.M.--Mr. Attorney General I am calling the case of the State v. 
John Thomas Scopes... 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL:If the Court please, in this case we think 
that it is proper that a new indictment be returned. 
THE COURT:Do you want a jury empaneled? 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL:Yes, sir, and a new indictment. 
THE COURT:Yes, sir. 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL:This indictment has been returned by 
agreement on both sides, but both sides are anxious that the record 
be kept straight and regular, and that no technical objection may be 
made in the appellate courts. 
THE COURT:Very well...
THE COURT:Now let's proceed to draw the jury, gentlemen...
(Grebstein, 32,33)
DOCUMENT 6:The Judge's Charge to the Grand Jury: 
"Gentlemen of the grand jury...the statute which it is alleged that 
John T. Scopes violated, is Chapter 27 of the acts of 1925 which 
makes it unlawful to teach...any theory that denies the story of 
divine creation of man as taught in the Bible and instead thereof that 
man descended from a lower order of animals. (the judge reads 
Section 1 of the Act)
(the judge reads first chapter of Genesis)
Therefore, the vital question now involved for your consideration is, 
has the statute been violated by the said John T. Scopes?... 
If you find the statute has been thus violated, you should indict the 
guilty person... 
You will bear in mind that in this investigation you are not interested 
to inquire into the policy or wisdom of this legislation... 
The policy and wisdom of any particular legislation addresses itself 
to the legislative branch of government, provided the proposed 
legislation is within constitutional limits. 
Our constitution imposes upon the judicial branch the interpretation 
of statutes and upon the executive branch the enforcement of the 
law... 
You may proceed with your investigation. (Grebstein, 34)
DOCUMENT 7:Darrow Challenges a Jury Member
(After the prospective jury member is questioned by the judge and 
the Attorney General for approval, the Defense is allowed determine 
whether or not the person is suitable) 
(Questions by Mr. Darrow): 
Q:What is your business? 
A:I am a minister. 
Q:Where abouts? 
A:I live in the second district of Rhea County, twenty miles north. 
Q:Ever preach on evolution? 
A:I don't think so, definitely; that is, on evolution alone. 
Q:Did you ever preach on evolution? 
A:Yes.  I haven't as a subject; just taken that up; in connection with 
other subjects. I have referred to it in discussing it.  
Q:Against it or for it? 
A:I am strictly for the Bible. 
Q:I am talking about evolution, I am not talking about the Bible. Did 
you preach for or against evolution? 
A:Is that a fair question, judge?
THE COURT:Yes, answer the question.
A:Well, I preached against it, of course! (Applause)
THE COURT:Let's have order.
MR. DARROW:Your honor, I am going to ask to have anybody 
excluded that applauds.
THE COURT:Yes, if you repeat that, ladies and gentlemen, you will be 
excluded.  We cannot have applause.  If you have feelings in this case 
you must not express them in the courtroom. If you do, I will have to 
exclude you.
Q:Have you formed a strong conviction against evolution?
A:Well, I have.
Q:You think you would be a fair juror in this case?
A:Well, I can take the law and the evidence in the case, I think, and 
try a man right...
Q:Have you heard of Mr. Scopes?
A:Yes, Sir; yes.
Q:You have heard that he is an evolutionist, haven't you?
A:Yes, sir, I have heard that...
Q:You now have the opinion that evolution is contrary to the Bible 
and that my client has been teaching evolution; as you stand there 
now, that is your opinion?
A:Sure it is.
Q:You could change it if you heard evidence enough to change it on?
A:Yes, sir.
Q:Otherwise you couldn't?
A:I have no right to; I don't think.
MR. DARROW:I challenge for cause.
THE COURT:Well, I want every juror to start in with an open mind.  I 
will excuse you, Mr. Massingill.
(After a total of seven additional challenges by Darrow, the Court, 
and the prosecution, the jury was completed.)
(Grebstein, 40-42)
DOCUMENT 8:The Court Questions Darrow
B:Do you believe that the Bible is the revealed will of God, inspired 
and trustworthy? 
D:I think there is much of value in the Bible, but I do not believe it is 
written or inspired by God. I believe it should be taken as every 
other book, and that the portions in it that are sublime, like such 
portions of every other great book, might be called inspired... 
B:Do you believe in the miracles recorded in the Old and New 
Testaments? 
D:I do not believe in miracles. I believe the universe acts and always 
has acted according to immutable law, and that whatever may be 
back of the universe, it has never violated these laws. 
B:Do you believe in the immortality of the soul? 
D:I have been searching for proof of this all my life with the same 
desire to find it that is incident to every living thing, and I have 
never found any evidence on the subject. (Grebstein, 132-133)
DOCUMENT 9:Quotation Sheet: Evolution and the Bible
As you read the following statements, ask yourself which of the 
following might agree with each one: John Scopes, William J. Bryan, 
Clarence Darrow, Judge Raulston. 
1."Evolution has no purpose; man must supply this for himself." 
2."The Butler Act rested on the belief that truth can be determined 
by taking a vote." 
3."Parents should not be deprived by Government of the right to 
direct the lives and education of their own children." 
4."If I lose faith in Genesis,I'm afraid I'll lose faith in the rest of the 
Bible, and if I want to commit larceny I'll say I don't believe in the 
part of the Bible that says 'thou shalt not steal.' The same thing 
applies to murder." 
5."In a democracy issues of policy must be resolved by the elective 
process, not by appointive judges." 
6."In the history of the world there has been nobody who has dealt 
scientifically with all questions." 
7."Morality depends on religion. Government cannot be indifferent to 
religion." 
8."Apart from human purposes, no Purpose exists." 
9."Human life is nothing without purpose. Read the Bible to 
determine God's purpose for you." 
10."Man has no real freedom of will; he is a machine; a product of 
heredity and environment." 
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{HR size="1"&gt;A NAME="19"}}
1
<hr/>
<h2>
Annotated Bibliography
</h2>
Coletta, Paolo E.  William Jennings Bryan, 3 Volumes. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press,  l969.  A sympathetic and thorough 
treatment of the "Great Commoner." Volume 3 was helpful in its 
treatment of the Scopes trial and deals well with the question, "Who 
won the Scopes trial?"
Weinberg, Arthur, ed.  Attorney For the Damned.  New York:  Simon 
and Schuster, 1957.  A summary of the many famous cases Clarence 
Darrow was participant in; a good introduction to the Scopes trial to 
set the mood. 
De Camp, L. Sprague.  The Great Monkey Trial.  Garden City, New 
York:  Doubleday and Company, Inc., 1968.  Well-documented, with a 
helpful discussion of Darwinian discoveries and experiments; brings 
out the humorous as well as the serious. 
Ginger, Ray.  Six Days or Forever? Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes. 
New York:  Oxford University Press, 1958.  Full of useful quotations; 
incisive and personal. Two especially good chapters, "Law as 
Symbolic Action" and "Some Perspectives" offer excellent insights 
into the trial as it fit into the 1920's and as its legacy lives on today. 
Grebstein, Sheldon Norman, ed.  Monkey Trial:  The State of 
Tennessee v. John Thomas Scopes.  Boston:  Houghton Mifflin 
Company, 1960.  Selected documents from the Scopes trial; an 
excellent teaching aid. Includes a section called "The Editorial 
Reaction" which students should find fascinating; also selections from 
Scopes' textbook and the Bible. 
Follette, Marcel C., ed.  Creationism, Science, and the Law:  The 
Arkansas Case.  Cambridge, Massachusetts:  The MIT Press, 1983. 
Documents from the case over "Balanced Treatment" of Creation- 
Science and Evolution-Science, with articles by historians, journalists, 
scientists and legal experts. 
Montagu, Ashley, ed.  Science and Creationism.  New York:  Oxford 
University Press, 1984.  Fairly technical, philosophical articles; one 
excellent contribution is "Creation, Evolution and High School Texts" 
which gives actual samples of what Creation-Science texts contain. 
Some contributors were witnesses at the Arkansas trial. 
National Academy of Sciences, Committee on Science and Creationism. 
Science and Creationism:  A View from the National Academy of 
Sciences.  Washington, D.C.; National Academy Press. 1984.  A nicely 
illustrated, attractively prepared book particularly created for 
classroom use; sensitively written. Only 26 pages. 
Shapley, Harlow, ed.  Science Ponders Religion.  New York:  Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1960.  Scientists write about religion; several 
selections on evolution and religion and the impact of one on the 
other; a philosophical work.
Tompkins, Jerry R., ed.  D-Days at Dayton.  Reflections on the Scopes 
Trial.  Baton Rouge:  Louisiana State University Press, 1965.  Very 
useful collection of articles, including John Scopes recollections forty 
years after the trial. Includes several Appendices of Affidavits read 
into the Dayton Court record in 1925. Illustrated.
Articles
Bentley, Michael L.  "On the Teaching of Origins."  70 Today's 
Education, 2 (April/May 1981):  56G-58G. 
Betts, John Rickards. "Darwinism, Evolution, and American Catholic 
Thought, 1860-1900."  45 Catholic Historical Review, 2 (July 1959): 
161-185.
"Californians Will Monitor Evolution Teaching in Schools."  26 
Christianity Today, 3 (5 February 1982):  69-70.
"The Creationists."  Special section in Science 81 (December 1981). 
"Creationists Lose in Arkansas."  26 Christianity Today, 2 (22 January 
1982):  28-29. 
Donohue, John W.  "Creation and Evolutions 'A Balanced Treatment.'" 
146 America, 5(6 February 1982):  90-92.
Gish, Duane T.  "Creation, Evolution, and the Historical Evidence." 35   
American Biology Teacher, 3 (March 1973):  132-140 
Gish, Duane T.  "The Scopes Trial in Reverse."  37 The Humanist, 6 
(November/December 1977): 50-51. 
Grabiner, J.V., and P.D. Miller.  "Effects of the Scopes Trial: Was it a 
Victory for Evolutionists?" 185 Science, 4145 (6 September l974):  
832-837.
Saladin, Kenneth S. "Opposing Creationism:  Scientists Organize." 42 
The Humanist, 2 (March/April 1982):  59, 61. 
Sky, Theodore.  "The Establishment Clause, Congress, and the Schools:  
An Historical Perspective."   52 Virginia Law Review, 8 (December 
1966):  1395-1466. 
Zuidema, Henry P.  "Genetics and Genesis:  The New Biology 
Textbooks that Include Creationism."  Creation/Evolution, (Summer 
198l):  18-22.
{{/pre&gt;A HREF="#top"&gt;To top of this unit/a&gt;PRE}}
{{/pre&gt;HR}}
{{FONT size=-1&gt;A HREF="http://teachersinstitute.yale.edu"&gt;Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute/a}}.  
Comments to {{A HREF="mailto:ynhti-helpyale.edu"&gt;ynhti-helpyale.edu/a&gt;.BR&gt;This URL is /curriculum/units/1988/1/88.01.02.htmlBR&gt;/font}}
{{/body}}
{{/html}}
</body>