---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 08.06.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2008/6/08.06.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "Exploring the Rhythm of Your Pulse"
unitAuthor: "Sheila M. Martin-Corbin"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Anatomy and Physiology, grades 11 and 12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 08.06.08:
</h4>
<p>
My unit focuses on the effect of physical exercise on heart and respiratory rates and maintaining a healthy lifestyle. The students at my school are immersed in the Arts. Much diversity is evident regarding ethnicity, and socio-economic status. Students are chosen on a lottery basis, from the inner city and suburban towns. Many students in my Human Anatomy class have failed Chemistry 1 and the science section on the standardized CAPT test. My goal is to spark their interest in science by engaging students in inquiry-based activities, relevant to their lives. Those students who failed the CAPT test must receive a B or better in the class in order to graduate. Many of those students regard science as “boring” and find it difficult to make the connections to technology and real-life situations. My goal is to make the connections by doing interdisciplinary hands-on activities, relating to health issues.
</p>
<p>
My objectives include that students will become motivated to do hands-on-activities and to make the connections with real-world situations. Students will not only make informed decisions about their health, but receive an excellent grade for the course and meet graduation requirements.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Anatomy and Physiology, grades 11 and 12)
</p>
</body>