---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1984/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.01.x.html">84.03.01</a> <br/> In order to examine some effects of Hispanic culture upon the United States, this unit focuses on the contributions made by Mexican Americans. Contains a variety of interesting activities. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.02.x.html">84.03.02</a> <br/> Concentrating on the New Haven area, this unit examines the patterns and problems of assimilation and acculturation experienced by Hispanic immigrants in the United States. Contains actual interviews with local Hispanics whose stories will be compared. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.03.x.html">84.03.03</a> <br/> Using art, literature, actual artifacts, and drama, this unit exposes pupils to the Mesoamerican Indian culture. Includes two skits based upon myth which the pupils might stage. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.04.x.html">84.03.04</a> <br/> Through a study of folktales, this unit increases pupils' knowledge and understanding of Panama and other Hispanic countries. Encourages the use of drama. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.05.x.html">84.03.05</a> <br/> This unit examines some of the cultural pressures affecting the lives of young Chicano and Puerto Rican parents. Contains a number of interesting case studies. Also uses film. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.06.x.html">84.03.06</a> <br/> This unit demonstrates how foreign language teachers can incorporate the teaching of culture. Primarily for French and Spanish classes. Contains a number of interesting, hands-on lessons. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.07.x.html">84.03.07</a> <br/> This unit examines the roles of males and females in Latin culture. Focusing primarily on women, students will examine three biological sketches of women from Argentina, Mexico, and Puerto Rico. Extensive background information is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.08.x.html">84.03.08</a> <br/> This unit presents the artistic heritage of Puerto Rico. It provides background information, some diagrams, and lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/4/84.04.03.x.html">84.04.03</a> <br/> Through the use of folktales, the role of women in traditional China is explored. Suggests Yale-China Association as a resource. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/4/84.04.05.x.html">84.04.05</a> <br/> This unit examines the African American oral tradition as an historical and social phenomenon. Students learn to apply synthesis, evaluation, and application to selected tales. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/5/84.05.03.x.html">84.05.03</a> <br/> This unit on television and teens contains an interesting section on stereotyping. Activities involve pupils in projects requiring them to gather statistics and information based upon their personal viewing programs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1984/5/84.05.06.x.html">84.05.06</a> <br/> This unit uses three novels to examine three different teenagers, including an African American male. They offer contrasts and comparisons that sometimes relate to culture. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>