---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 98.06.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1998/6/98.06.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "Exploring the Moon - A Curriculum Adapted for Use With the Visually-Impaired"
unitAuthor: "Joanne R. Pompano"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: ""
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 98.06.06:
</h4>
Man first landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969 and last walked on the lunar surface in December 1972.  The discoveries from these missions have changed our knowledge of the Earth, the Moon and the Universe both past and present.  This curriculum will help students to understand the origin and geology of the Moon.  In addition, it will trace both manned and unmanned flights to the Moon including the Clementine, Lunar Prospector, and Apollo programs.  It will include scientific information from the most current discoveries such as the recent discovery of large deposits of ice on the North and South poles of the Moon.  This curriculum examines the importance of such findings.
<p>
This unit will use a multi-sensory approach to help students understand Earth's only natural satellite.  The data and information provided will teach students that understanding the Moon helps us to understand the Earth.  Lesson plans will provide students with activities that will actively involve them in studying our closest neighbor in the Solar System.
</p>
<p>
This curriculum was developed for students in grades 4-6 attending regular and special education programs.  Lessons are designed to make visually handicapped students successful in their quest for scientific knowledge and to allow them the same learning opportunities as their sighted peers.  Teachers are encouraged to provide direct access to materials, objects, and models and to provide students with a variety of opportunities to understand the material presented.
</p>
</body>