---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1990/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.01.x.html">90.01.01</a> <br/> A well-written, practical treatment of how to teach biography and autobiography and the distinctive qualities of each. Chock full of tips to encourage student writing assignments, with emphasis on the "writing-centered classroom." Emphasis on minority cultures and the struggle for survival. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.02.x.html">90.01.02</a> <br/> The author seeks to strike a balance between universal and unique Hispanic experiences through a search for identity within the U.S. mainstream culture. Three poetry lessons and a useful discussion of two previous autobiography units are included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.03.x.html">90.01.03</a> <br/> Brief discussion of specific goals and lessons geared for elementary special education students, who will write an autobiography after exposure to Latin American writers and poets. Includes student bibliography. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.04.x.html">90.01.04</a> <br/> Gives significant historical background to the Caribbean slave system with major focus on Juan Mazona, an escaped slave who later wrote of his experiences. Useful detailed lesson plans include an eight-page Appendix which contains narrative and poetry. Helpful bibliography. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.05.x.html">90.01.05</a> <br/> The author's stated goal is to make students aware of the "historical significance of economic autonomy and oppression and its influence on economic reformation," for blacks and Puerto Ricans pursuing the "American Dream." Includes helpful bibliography. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.06.x.html">90.01.06</a> <br/> After a brief contrast of the nature of North American and Latin American immigration, the unit discusses in great detail how Argentina's immigrants have achieved a true "melting pot," due to several unique historical factors. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.07.x.html">90.01.07</a> <br/> A multicultural treatment of how Spanish traditions and Native American culture developed into a Latin American culture, integrating history, language, Language Arts, and Foreign Language methodologies. Full of ideas for teachers. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/1/90.01.08.x.html">90.01.08</a> <br/> The unit begins with an introduction to the pre-Columbian Literature of France and Spain. The unit's major focus is literary, with memoirs and diary entries from major New World explorers of the 16th and 18th centuries. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.05.x.html">90.02.05</a> <br/> A well-designed blueprint for selecting and performing a simple dramatic piece, with emphasis on eliminating stereotypes about Afro-Americans in film. Creative suggestions include theater games, auditioning tips, character development and set blocking. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.07.x.html">90.02.07</a> <br/> This unit includes nine weeks of activities designed to get kids involved in producing an authentic play about Egypt. Lesson plans suggest ways to integrate several disciplines in the play research and production. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.08.x.html">90.02.08</a> <br/> The major objective of this well-documented unit is to involve students in script-writing an historical play. The Amistad Affair is presented in eight scenes. Students must create dialogue and stage directions. Balances creativity with historical accuracy. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.09.x.html">90.02.09</a> <br/> This unit attempts to develop a clearer understanding of the role which the feminist movement played in contemporary society. The author chooses scenes from four plays, <i>The</i> <i>Women,</i> <i>A</i> <i>Raisin</i> <i>in</i> <i>the</i> <i>Sun,</i> <i>Letters</i> Home, and <i>Ma</i> <i>Rose</i> in which issues such as divorce, death, growing up, and self-worth are the targets. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.10.x.html">90.02.10</a> <br/> Achieves the unit's objective--to instruct students to create a mock murder trial, with an explanation of courtroom roles, terminology, and procedures. Students create a drama using theater techniques with many practical tips. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/2/90.02.11.x.html">90.02.11</a> <br/> This multicultural unit successfully integrates many academic disciplines and is adaptable to all grade levels. Contains a unique script about alien visitors who investigate Puerto Rico, Ghana, and Russia. Includes a variety of "down-to-earth" suggestions to get students involved. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/3/90.03.08.x.html">90.03.08</a> <br/> Historic in perspective, the unit discusses cultures and surroundings of Navajo, Zuni, and Hopi Indians. Includes instructions in weaving, mask-making, and Navajo fry bread, plus a number of other projects. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/3/90.03.09.x.html">90.03.09</a> <br/> A detailed, research-oriented unit designed to help students gain writing and map skills. The unit includes several brief biographies of African Americans for whom National Historic Landmarks have been set up. A detailed description of the "Black Heritage Trail" in Boston is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.01.x.html">90.04.01</a> <br/> Researched in detail, unit discusses the changing nature of family roles and issues. Media stereotypes of both black and white families are highlighted. Includes creative student activities and detailed lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.04.x.html">90.04.04</a> <br/> This multi-cultural unit focuses on Puerto Rican families and customs, contrasting them with those from Spain, France, and Italy. Chock full of practical readings, film lists, and suggestions for local field trips. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.05.x.html">90.04.05</a> <br/> This unit examines the history and impact of black writer-storytellers traced to West African roots. Included are preachers, joke-tellers, griots, and contemporary black authors. Features a "Fun Activities" section. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.06.x.html">90.04.06</a> <br/> The author's thesis is that the American black family is in crisis; the unit stresses the strengths of the black family and various methods of survival. Patriarchal African family traditions are highlighted. Interesting treatment of the "helping tradition" developed during slavery and its status today. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.07.x.html">90.04.07</a> <br/> The author's goal is to help students view people that are "different" more positively, using literature and history, and cooperative learning techniques. For general use. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.08.x.html">90.04.08</a> <br/> This unit is an overview of how American families have responded to the different historical and economic situations from tribal to agricultural to industrial. The changing nature of family members' roles as conditions change into the future. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.09.x.html">90.04.09</a> <br/> This unit emphasizes the need to make students more aware of American Black Culture through a study of five featured Black visual artists. It encourages students to appreciate and identify the worth and works of these artists. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/4/90.04.10.x.html">90.04.10</a> <br/> Information and activities in this unit challenge students to observe, appreciate and write responsively. The unit features paintings and photographs which depict roles and stereotypes featuring American black men and women throughout history. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.01.x.html">90.05.01</a> <br/> Using literature, this unit examines families representing African American, White, Japanese, Chinese, and Native American cultures from a sociological view. Contains useful background information and an interesting lesson built around family photographs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.02.x.html">90.05.02</a> <br/> In an attempt to encourage reading and writing, this unit examines five families, real and fictional, including one depicting the inhumanities on a slave ship. Provides summaries and suggestions for lessons with each book. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.03.x.html">90.05.03</a> <br/> Using literature, music, and dance, this unit focuses on the different ethnic families in America: Puerto Rican, Jewish, Chinese, and African. Pupils create their own dances. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.05.x.html">90.05.05</a> <br/> Aimed at middle school groups with emotional and learning problems, but easily adaptable to others, this unit uses literature to explore the family, African American, and Hispanic. Activities stress social development. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.06.x.html">90.05.06</a> <br/> Using two novels, this unit examines a 19th century white American family and a middle class African American family of the 1950's, followed by a study of family groups represented in the class. Presents art, particularly photography as a chronicler of the family. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.07.x.html">90.05.07</a> <br/> Focusing on Irish immigrants, this unit hopes to illustrate the experiences encountered by immigrant families in 19th century America. Background information, along with a variety of engaging activities, is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.08.x.html">90.05.08</a> <br/> Using the literature and life of Zora Neale Hurston, this unit examines the African American family of the Rural South. Contains background information for the teacher. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.09.x.html">90.05.09</a> <br/> Examines the African American family through different forms of literature, film, and pupils' family histories. Interesting section on oral literature. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.10.x.html">90.05.10</a> <br/> Uses different forms of literature and art, especially photography, to develop the historical and personal significance of the African American family. Three engaging lesson plans included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1990/5/90.05.11.x.html">90.05.11</a> <br/> By using various forms of literature and art, this unit traces the historical development of the African American family. Contains background information and detailed suggestions for lessons. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>