---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/pubs/A14/polio.html"
---
<main>
<center>
<h2>Collaboration: Feedback from Teachers</h2>
<font size="+1">By Norine Polio</font>
</center>
<hr/>
Collaborate: to work with others. In the spirit of the inaugural issue of
<i>On Common Ground,</i> I sent a questionnaire to a group of public
school educators who are Fellows of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
This collaboration, established in 1978 between the New Haven public
school system and Yale University, unites public school teachers in
seminars with university humanities and science teachers, resulting in
published curriculum units for use in the classroom. The Fellows polled
include one who has since become an administrator, one librarian, and five
teachers.<font size="-1"><b>1</b></font>
Respondents were asked to comment on four topics suggested at the December
1991 conference at Yale: "School-College Collaboration: Preparing Teachers
and Curricula for Public Schools." In attendance at the conference were
representatives from 27 programs nationwide, many of which emphasize
teacher leadership and collaboration. In addition to policymakers,
administrators from public schools and colleges, and college teachers,
public school teachers were an integral part of the proceedings, actively
involved in planning and serving as panelists. Public school teachers as
leaders and professionals­the tenet upon which this Institute and
other successful collaborations are based.
<p>
Following are the topics and syntheses of Fellows' responses:
</p><p>
<b>1. The particular services collaborative programs can provide to public
school districts.</b>
</p><p>
Through collaboration, the art of teaching is seen as the common
denominator, uniting elementary, middle school, high school, and college
educators. The sense of isolation often felt in the public school
classroom is alleviated when teachers on all levels meet together to
discuss content, methodologies, and common challenges. Sharing information
and resources enriches teaching and increases confidence in one's subject
matter. Teachers model collaboration when they take the new ideas and
strategies directly back to their students, encouraging them, in turn, to
work together.</p><p>
<b>2. The role of public school administrators, principals in particular,
with respect to teacher collaborative programs.</b>
</p><p>
Administrators who make collaboration a priority set the tone for working
together by actively seeking the ideas of teachers and students. They
visit classrooms regularly, get involved in class projects, attend
workshops with teachers, and design teaching schedules to include common
planning time for interdisciplinary projects. These administrators
recognize the need for quality materials generated by teachers to
supplement textbooks and allow teachers to work together to develop new
curricula.
</p><p>
<b>3. The incentives for participation of teachers from universities and
schools.</b>
</p><p>
Intellectual exchange between teachers on all levels is considered the
primary incentive of collaboration. Public school and university teachers
are challenged by the same goal­to provide a stimulating learning
environment for students. When issues and ideas are generated among adult
learners, this enthusiasm spills over to the classroom. Teachers from
universities visit public school classes and vice versa. University
teachers develop a sensitivity to the public school community and public
school teachers, in turn, gain new insight into the challenges of the
university classroom.
</p><p>
<b>4. The evaluation of collaborative educational programs.</b>
</p><p>
Qualitative analysis of the curriculum materials developed in
collaborative programs can best be accomplished by the students
themselves. These student voices, often left out of education, are the
most important and generally the most honest and inspiring. Teachers
evaluating other teachers is another strategy which is supportive and non
threatening. Visiting a colleague's classroom to observe new materials
being presented is encouraged. Whatever the format, there should be an
on-going analysis and re-shaping of new curriculum materials to reflect
the changing needs of students.
</p><p>
During informal discussions after the questionnaires were returned,
Fellows spoke enthusiastically about collaboration. Some veterans, others
relatively new to teaching, these educators described their experiences as
refreshing, stimulating, creative, energizing, supportive. These are the
feelings they cannot help but pass on to their students. A community of
learners, inspired, inspiring­this is collaboration.
</p><h3> Notes</h3>
1. Fellows: Linn Bayne, Bill Derry, Silvia Ducach, Mary Alice Howley,
Sheila Martin-Corbin, Maggie Roberts, Eva Scopino. 
<hr/>
<h4><a href=".\">Back to
Table of Contents of the Fall 1993 Issue of <i>On Common
Ground</i></a>
</h4>
</main>