---
layout: page
title: Empowering Teachers as Colleagues
path: /articles/C1.html
---
<main>
      <div class="container region-content">
        <div class="row">
          <div class="col-sm-9 mt-3">
            <h2 class="page-title title">
              Empowering Teachers as Colleagues
            </h2>
            <p class="article_author">By James R. Vivian</p>
            <div class="article_table_contents">
              <p class="article_table_contents_header">Contents:</p>
              <p>
                <a href="#a">
                  Preface
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a href="#b">
                  The State of Teacher Preparation
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#c">
                  A Microcosm of Urban Education
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#d">
                  A Vested Interest
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#e">
                  Governing Principles
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#f">
                  Finance
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#g">
                  Evaluation
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#h">
                  Recommendations
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a   href="#i">
                  References
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="a"></a>
              <p>
                As the national movement for university-school collaboration
                becomes more sharply focused on assisting school teachers, the
                Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute demonstrates how collaborative
                programs can strengthen teaching and learning in the nation s
                public schools. In the Carnegie Report on High School, Ernest L.
                Boyer called for greater emphasis on subject matter in the
                initial preparation of the teacher and for "a planned continuing
                education program . . . [as] part of every teacher s
                professional life" (Boyer, 1983, p. l78). As Boyer later wrote
                in commenting on the numerous education studies and reports
                released in 1983, "We are beginning to see that whatever is
                wrong with America s schools cannot be fixed without the help of
                those teachers already in the classrooms. Most of them will be
                there for years to come, and teachers must be viewed as part of
                the solution, not as part of the problem" (Boyer, 1984, p. 526).
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                > Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="b"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">
                The State of Teacher Preparation
              </h3>
              <p>
                The needs of teachers in our public schools are compelling.
                Nationally, only 6l.9 percent of teachers in the arts and
                humanities and only 43.7 percent of teachers in the sciences and
                mathematics are certified or eligible for certification in the
                field they are currently teaching (National Center for Education
                Statistics, 1983, p. 206). In New Haven, too, a high percentage
                of teachers have minimal formal preparation in their subjects.
                Only 58.8 percent of secondary school teachers in the humanities
                and 36 percent of secondary school teachers in mathematics and
                the sciences majored in college or graduate school in the
                subjects they are teaching. Moreover, because scholarship in
                these fields is constantly changing, even if a high proportion
                of teachers had majored in the subjects they teach, they would
                still need to stay abreast of the developments in their fields.
              </p>
              <p>
                The present state of teacher preparation in the humanities and
                the sciences will not be readily improved as a result of new
                teachers entering the profession. There are already
                well-publicized shortages of qualified teachers in some subjects
                and some areas of the country, even though the National Center
                for Education Statistics projects that the total demand
                nationally for secondary school teachers will continue to
                decline through 1988 (NCES, 1984, p. 36). These shortages may
                well become more widespread and severe at the secondary level as
                the children of the "baby boomlet," who began this year to
                increase total elementary school enrollment, begin in the
                mid-1990s to enter secondary schools (McCarthy, 1984, pp. 7-8).
              </p>
              <p>
                In New Haven the current rate of teacher turnover is only about
                2 percent. In so stable a teaching force many individuals are
                reassigned to teach subjects they either have not taught
                recently, or have never taught before. Furthermore, even in
                times of higher turnover of teachers, teaching assignments and
                therefore teachers' needs for further preparation and new
                classroom materials change frequently in response to shifting
                priorities of schools, which are so influenced by social and
                political change.
              </p>
              <p>               
                In short, to strengthen teaching in public schools we must
                provide for the ongoing preparation of individuals already in,
                and now entering, the profession.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a 
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="c"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">
                A Microcosm of Urban Education
              </h3>
              <p>               
                The demographic characteristics of the New Haven Public Schools
                mirror urban public education in the United States. In terms of
                the proportion of the population living below the Federally
                established poverty line, New Haven is the seventh poorest city
                in the nation. Of the students in New Haven s public secondary
                schools, more than 60 percent come from families receiving
                public assistance. The percentage of minority students enrolled
                in New Haven s public schools is higher than in 39 of 46 major
                urban school districts surveyed recently. At 83 percent (mostly
                Black and Hispanic), the rate of minority student enrollment is
                approximately the same as in Chicago, and higher than in
                Baltimore, Miami, Philadelphia, Birmingham, Cleveland, and St.
                Louis (National School Boards Association, 1983, p. 3).
                Nationally, the percentage of Black and Hispanic students
                entering the ninth grade who do not graduate is about twice as
                great as the proportion of White students who complete high
                school (National Coalition of Advocates for Students, 1985, p.
                9). In New Haven, 45 percent of individuals entering the ninth
                grade do not graduate.
              </p>
              <p>               
                As Adrienne Y. Bailey, Vice President for Academic Affairs of
                the College Board, points out, "since this demographic pattern
                [in New Haven] will become increasingly characteristic of public
                school enrollment throughout the United States, the Yale-New
                Haven Teachers Institute has chosen, in a sense, to wrestle with
                the nation s educational future" (Vivian, 1985, p. vii).
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="d"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">A Vested Interest</h3>
              <p>               
                As Yale President A. Bartlett Giamatti has said, "it is
                profoundly in our self-interest to have coherent, well-taught,
                well-thought-out curricula" in our local schools and in
                secondary schools throughout the country. The Institute is
                important to Yale, in terms of those of its own students coming
                from New Haven schools, and also in terms of what faculty
                members who lead Institute seminars gain from the program. They
                increase their knowledge about public schools and therefore
                about the educational background of a majority of their own
                students. Many faculty members also assert that their experience
                with the Institute has influenced their own teaching and
                scholarship.
              </p>
              <p>            
                In the absence of a school or department of Education, the
                Institute serves, in effect, as a center for faculty from
                throughout the institution who care deeply about public
                education and wish to have a practical, constructive
                involvement. The Institute draws its faculty from numerous
                departments of both Yale College and the Graduate School and
                from the Schools of Architecture, Art, Divinity, Engineering,
                Forestry and Environmental Studies, Law, and Medicine.
              </p>
              <p>              
                The Institute is also of unquestioned value with respect to the
                University s relationship with New Haven. In 1984 the University
                Council on Priorities and Planning wrote: "Yale s principal
                mission is education. Thus, it seems only natural that Yale
                concentrate its community efforts upon helping the local public
                schools meet the enormous challenge of preparing a significantly
                poor and undereducated population to compete successfully in
                America s increasingly technical job market"(Council on
                Priorities and Planning, 1984, pp. 26-27).
              </p>
              <p>              
                The relationship between the University and the Schools must be
                both prominent and permanent within any viable larger
                relationship between Yale and New Haven, and, of the many ways
                Yale might aid New Haven, none is more logical than a program
                that shares Yale s educational resources with the Schools.
                Because of changing student needs, changing objectives set by
                the school system and each level of government, and changing
                scholarship, school curricula undergo constant revision. Because
                of Yale s strength in the academic disciplines, further
                preparing teachers in the subjects they teach, and assisting
                teachers to develop curricula and to keep abreast of changes in
                their fields are the ways that Yale can most readily assist the
                Schools. The intent of the Institute is not, then, to create new
                resources at Yale; rather, it is to make available in a planned
                way our existing strength, that is, to expand and to
                institutionalize the work of University faculty members with
                their colleagues in the Schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="e"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">Governing Principles</h3>
              <p>               
                The Teachers Institute was established in 1978 as a joint
                program of Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools,
                designed to strengthen teaching and thereby to improve student
                learning in the humanities and the sciences in our community s
                middle and high schools. Four principles guide the program and
                constitute much of its distinctiveness: First, teachers of
                students at different levels can and must interact as colleagues
                to address the common problems of teaching their disciplines.
                Second, teacher leadership is crucial in efforts to revitalize
                public education. Third, teaching is central to the educational
                process, and teacher developed materials are essential for
                student learning, particularly in urban school districts like
                New Haven s. Fourth, university-school collaboration must be
                long-term if it is to be truly effective.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Collegiality</h4>
              <p>               
                Each year about eighty New Haven school teachers, or almost 25
                percent of all secondary school teachers in the humanities and
                the sciences, become Fellows of the Institute to work as
                colleagues with Yale faculty members on topics the teachers
                themselves have identified. The Institute is organized to foster
                collegiality. Through the Institute, teachers become full
                members of the Yale community and are listed in the University
                directory of faculty and staff. This has symbolic meaning in
                recognizing them as colleagues and practical value in making the
                human and physical resources of the University accessible to
                them. Teachers who complete the program successfully receive an
                honorarium, as well as certification of their course of study,
                if they are pursuing an advanced degree.
              </p>
              <p>              
                The Institute's demanding five-month program of talks and
                seminars incorporates the Fellows preparation of new curricular
                materials that they and other teachers will use in the coming
                school year. The materials Fellows write are compiled into a
                volume for each seminar and distributed to all New Haven
                teachers who might use them. Seminar members promote widespread
                use of these materials by presenting workshops for other
                teachers during the school year.
              </p>
              <p>             
                A number of the University's most distinguished faculty members
                have given talks and led seminars in the program. The talks are
                intended to stimulate thinking and discussion and to point up
                interdisciplinary relationships in scholarship and teaching. The
                seminars, which are not regular courses, have the related and
                equally important purposes of increasing Fellows' background and
                developing new curricular materials on the seminar subjects. As
                a group, Fellows study the seminar subject generally by
                discussing common readings; individually, each Fellow selects a
                more limited aspect of the subject, and researches and develops
                it in depth for classroom use. Each seminar must balance these
                complementary, but in some ways distinct, activities.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Teacher Leadership</h4>
              <p>                
                In every New Haven middle and high school teachers serve as
                Representatives of their colleagues in planning and organizing
                the program. A second group of teachers, Institute Coordinators,
                coordinates the work of the School Representatives, oversees the
                conduct of the program, and also has major responsibility for
                long-range planning, program evaluation, and national
                dissemination.
              </p>
              <p>              
                Each fall, the School Representatives canvass the teachers in
                their schools to determine the subjects that prospective Fellows
                would like the Institute to treat. The Institute then circulates
                descriptions of seminars that address teachers interests, and
                the Institute Coordinators, after several meetings with the
                Representatives, ultimately select which seminars will be
                offered. In effect, New Haven teachers determine the subject
                matter for the program each year. In applying to the Institute,
                teachers describe curriculum unit topics on which they propose
                to work and the relationship of these topics both to Institute
                seminars and to courses they will teach in the coming school
                year. In this way, the seminar leaders can tailor the readings
                and discussions of the seminars to Fellows specific interests
                and teaching needs.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Long-term Collaboration</h4>
              <p>             
                The objective of the Teachers Institute is annually to involve
                as many school teachers as possible and to offer a range of
                seminar subjects that span the humanities and the sciences, so
                that the program can address school curricula, and thus
                students' education, broadly. More than 200 individual teachers
                have completed the program successfully from one to eight times,
                and 57 Yale faculty members have given Institute talks or led
                one or more seminars. Since 1978, the Institute has offered 51
                different seminars in the arts and humanities, the social
                sciences, mathematics, and the physical and life sciences.
              </p>
              <p>              
                In the humanities Institute offerings have included studies of a
                particular genre of literature, thematic approaches to
                literature, seminars on the teaching of writing, and
                interdisciplinary approaches to literature and history.
                Additional seminars have examined state and local history, and
                have focused on recent American, British, or Latin American
                history. The Institute has also offered several seminars on
                material culture and architecture. In the social sciences
                Institute seminars have explored themes in American adolescence
                and the American family, often approaching these topics from
                historical and cross-cultural perspectives. Through various
                Institute seminars, from architecture to medical imaging,
                teachers have worked on applications of mathematics, and some
                seminars have concentrated on mathematics, including statistics.
                In the sciences the Institute s work has taken a strongly
                interdisciplinary approach. Several seminars related study of
                the physical environment to human biology and human history;
                others also integrated the physical and life sciences and
                incorporated advanced medical technology. Through these
                Institute seminars Fellows have developed more than 430
                individual curriculum units for use in school courses.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Curriculum development</h4>
              <p>
                The Institute's approach differs from conventional modes of
                curriculum development. Classroom teachers, who best know their
                students' needs, work collegially and intensively with Yale
                faculty members, who are leading scholars in their fields. The
                Institute does not develop curricula on certain topics only
                because they are important in terms of recent scholarship;
                rather, it brings this current knowledge of a field to the
                assistance of teachers in the areas they identify as their main
                concerns. The Institute involves no "curriculum experts" in the
                usual sense, who would themselves prepare new materials, train
                teachers in short-term workshops to use these materials, and
                then expect the materials significantly to improve classroom
                teaching. Instead, the Institute demonstrates that long-term
                collaboration between school teachers and university scholars
                can produce curriculum materials of high quality pertinent to
                student needs, and can have a real influence on teaching and
                learning in the schools.
              </p>
              <p>             
                What Fellows write, then, is not "curriculum" in the usual
                sense. They are not developing content and skill objectives for
                each course and grade level, nor are they preparing day-by-day
                lesson plans for their courses. Institute units also differ from
                traditional curricula in form; they are not composed mainly of
                lists and outlines of topics to be covered. Rather, teachers
                research and write in prose on a manageable topic within the
                seminar subject and strategies for introducing that topic in
                their own teaching.
              </p>
              <p>               
                By writing a curriculum unit, teachers think formally about the
                ways in which what they are learning can be applied in their own
                teaching; we emphasize that the Institute experience must have
                direct bearing on their own classes. This balance between
                academic preparation and practical, classroom application as
                well as the depth and duration of our local collaborative
                relationship are central features of the Yale-New Haven Teachers
                Institute.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="f"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">Finance</h3>
              <p>               
                The cost of the Institute stems from our belief that the program
                is, for University and School participants, a vital professional
                activity for which they should be remunerated accordingly. Yale
                and the New Haven Schools together support a major share of the
                total cost of the program. A considerable portion of the
                remaining need has been met through strong support from the
                National Endowment for the Humanities. We have been pleased also
                to receive operating funds from numerous foundations and
                corporations including more than fifty local businesses which
                see our efforts to improve the public schools as important to
                the economic development of our city and region.
              </p>
              <p>                
                In 1982, after five years of developing the Teachers Institute
                as a model of university-school collaboration, Yale and the
                Schools decided to seek a $4 million endowment to give the
                program a secure future. The present endowment campaign
                underscores our deep belief in the long-term significance of the
                Teachers Institute to the University and to our community s
                public schools. It also represents our determination to
                demonstrate that effective collaborative programs can be not
                only developed, but also sustained
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="g"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">Evaluation</h3>
              <p>              
                Our evaluation practices thus far have included four principal
                activities: review by outside consultants, written evaluation by
                all participants, surveys of curriculum unit use, and a
                system-wide analysis of the program using lengthy questionnaires
                with many responses that are quantifiable. The results of these
                evaluations offer real encouragement that collaborative programs
                can assist our schools in specific ways.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Consultants</h4>
              <p>
                The annual evaluations by outside consultants have been
                particularly gratifying. In his report in 198l, Ernest L. Boyer
                wrote: "The impact of the Yale-New Haven Institute far exceeded
                my expectations. ... Rarely does [school-college collaboration]
                get to the heart of the matter helping teachers and advancing
                the quality of education. The Yale-New Haven teacher project is
                a dramatic exception to this rule."
              </p>
              <p>Theodore R. Sizer, wrote in his report in 1983:</p>
              <blockquote>
                I share the view of my predecessor "visitors" that yours is a
                remarkable program, for its clear and useful focus, for its
                simplicity and above all else for the atmosphere of constructive
                collegiality between Yale and New Haven teachers that has been
                created. . . . The arguments for the current scale are powerful.
                All too few school "reform" efforts get the scale right; almost
                universally they are too ambitious.
              </blockquote>
              Norman C. Francis evaluated the program in 1984. He wrote in his
              report:
              <blockquote>
                [The] experience and current presence [of the Teachers
                Institute] as a cooperative venture in and of itself argues for
                the absolute need for it to continue to be an example of how
                these difficult change ventures between colleges and
                universities and schools can be developed and nurtured. Its
                efforts have inestimable value for a number of local school
                districts, colleges and universities, all of which are talking
                about the need to work together, but are uncertain about how and
                where to start.
              </blockquote>
              <h4 class="article_h3">District-wide study</h4>
              <p>
                A comprehensive analysis of the program in 1982 showed that the
                Institute has significantly increased teachers knowledge of
                their disciplines, raised their morale, heightened their
                expectations of their students ability to learn, and has in turn
                improved student learning. About half of the participating
                teachers reported that the Institute contributed to their
                decision to continue teaching in our public schools. With
                respect to the future, only 11 percent of Fellows said they did
                not intend to participate again in the Institute. Eighty percent
                of teachers who had not been Fellows said they would take part,
                or would consider participating, in the future. This confirms
                our belief that the Institute will continue annually to attract
                first-time participants together with former Fellows on a
                recurring basis.
              </p>
            </div>
            <h4 class="article_h3">Plans</h4>
            <p>
              Over the next three years, the Institute will conduct a series of
              studies on the ways in which university-school collaboration can
              strengthen teaching and learning in public schools. Specifically,
              with the advice and assistance of our National Advisory Committee
              composed of distinguished educators and philanthropists, we will
              further investigate the bearing of the Teachers Institute on the
              preparation, effectiveness, morale, and retention of public school
              teachers.
            </p>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="h"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">Recommendations</h3>
            <p>             
                The Department of Education recently surveyed over 9,300 school
                districts nationwide for existing partnerships. Of the 46,000
                partnerships they identified, only 5.2 percent are partnerships
                involving colleges and universities (U.S. Department of
                Education, 1985, Appendix Table III A). First, then, we must
                work not only to sustain the national movement for partnerships
                in education, but also to increase the participation of colleges
                and universities within the movement.
              </p>
              <p>              
                There is, in my view, no more important recommendation in the
                Carnegie Foundation Special Report on School and College
                (Maeroff, 1983, p. viii) than the one that calls for
                universities and schools to develop genuine partnerships based
                on the needs of schools as determined by their principals and
                teachers. Both aspects of this recommendation are essential: not
                only that universities and schools work together, but especially
                that those of us in higher education encourage our colleagues in
                schools to show us the ways we can marshall our resources to
                address their needs.
              </p>
              <p>               
                From our experience in New Haven, I would offer the following
                guidelines for the successful implementation of the Carnegie
                recommendation.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Definitions</h4>
              <p>
                "Collaboration" is a term currently used to describe quite
                varied activities. I mean by the term something specific.
                Collaboration arises from a recognition of mutual interest
                between school and college between city and college that must
                become more widespread if we are to improve our public schools.
                Within a partnership of institutions there should be a coequal
                relationship of colleagues, a volunteer association of
                individuals who choose to work together, of allies in league to
                improve our schools. An equal importance must be attached to
                what each partner brings to the relationship. The aim is to work
                together without everybody changing place.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Resources</h4>
              <p>
                Because institutional and other resources are never adequate, an
                early step in establishing a collaborative program is to assess
                the resources that can be made available to meet the needs of
                schools, and then to apply these resources in an intensive way
                where the need is greatest. Institutional support must come from
                both sides of the partnership; tangible and highly visible
                evidence of such commitment is essential. Participants should be
                compensated as generously as possible, in order to make their
                collaboration both demanding and professionally important.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Aims</h4>
              <p>
                We especially need to encourage partnerships between schools and
                colleges and universities that concentrate on teaching and on
                the continuing engagement of teachers with their fields.
                Cooperative efforts should insist on a direct application in
                school classrooms, and not merely assume that their work
                together will somehow improve teaching and learning in the
                classroom.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Limitations</h4>
              <p>
                A tendency in establishing collaborative programs as in school
                reform efforts generally is to be too ambitious. Programs will
                succeed only if they have well-defined and manageable goals;
                they should avoid making impossible claims.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Evaluation</h4>
              <p>
                Precisely because collaborative projects can achieve only
                limited, though important, results, participants must be
                confident that their efforts are worthwhile. An ongoing
                evaluation process is therefore integral to a program s design
                and should be used perennially to refine both goals and
                activities. Because collaborative programs are often,
                unfortunately, seen as non-traditional because they may not be
                regarded as central to the mission of either institutional
                partner they have a special burden for providing sound evidence
                of their results.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Teacher Leadership</h4>
              <p>
                The most successful projects may well begin small, investing
                real authority in teacher leadership and developing organically
                based on the needs teachers identify. In that way, programs are
                not guided by preconceptions, but grow from their own local
                experience. Efforts at school improvement will not succeed
                without teacher leadership. In this country we have too long
                held teachers responsible for the condition of our schools
                without giving them responsibility empowering them to improve
                our schools.
              </p>
              <h4 class="article_h3">Duration</h4>
              <p>
                For these reasons, and for the benefits to be lasting, effective
                collaborative programs must be long-term.
              </p>
              <p>                
                Finally, an observation: In universities we assume that ongoing
                scholarship is indispensable to good teaching. The Teachers
                Institute demonstrates the similar value to school teachers of
                ongoing study and writing about their discipline. Through
                colleagueship with teachers from the University, this continuing
                engagement with their subjects becomes part of school teachers'
                professional lives.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="i"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">References</h3>Boyer, E. L.
              <i>High School: A Report on Secondary Education in America.</i>
              New York: Harper and Row, 1983.
              <p>
                Boyer, E. L. "Reflections on the Great Debate of '83."
                <i>Phi Delta Kappan</i>, April 1984, pp. 525-530.
              </p>
              <p>
                Council on Priorities and Planning.
                <i>             
                  Report of the Council on Priorities and Planning, 1983-1984
                </i>
                . New Haven: Yale University, 1984.
              </p>
              <p>
                Maeroff, G. I.
                <i>School and College: Partnerships in Education</i>. Princeton:
                The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1983.
              </p>
              <p>
                McCarthy, K. F.
                <i>
                  Q s and A s About the Future of the Three R's: A Demographer's
                  Perspective.
                </i>
                Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1984.
              </p>
              <p>
                National Center for Education Statistics.
                <i> The Condition of Education</i>, 1983 Edition. Washington,
                D.C., 1983.
              </p>
              <p>
                National Center for Education Statistics.
                <i>The Condition of Education</i>, 1984 Edition. Washington,
                D.C., 1984.
              </p>
              <p>
                National Coalition of Advocates for Students.
                <i>Barriers to Excellence: Our Children at Risk.</i> Boston,
                1985.
              </p>
              <p>
                National School Boards Association.
                <i>
                  A Survey of Public Education in the Nation's Urban School
                  Districts
                </i>
                . Washington, D.C., 1983.
              </p>
              <p>
                United States Department of Education.
                <i>Partnerships in Education: Education Trends of the Future</i>
                Washington, D.C., 1985.
              </p>
              <p>
                Vivian, J. R., and others.
                <i>
                  Teaching in America: The Common Ground, A Report of the
                  Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
                </i>
                . New York: The College Entrance Examination Board, 1985.
              </p>
            </div>
            <p>
              <a 
                href="#"
                id="backtotop"
                class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                role="button"
                aria-pressed="true"
              >
                Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
              </a>
            </p>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </main>
