---
layout: "page"
title: "Issues in Establishing and Developing an Educational Collaboration: The Yale-New Haven Experience"
path: "/articles/C6.html"
---
<main>
<center><h2>Issues in Establishing and Developing an Educational Collaboration <br/><i> The Yale-New Haven Experience</i></h2>
<font size="+1">by James R. Vivian</font>
</center>
<hr/>
<h4>Contents: </h4>
<ul>
<li><a href="#a">Introduction</a></li>
<li><a href="#b">The New Haven Setting</a></li>
<li><a href="#c">Conditions for Beginning</a></li>
<li><a href="#d">Assessing Needs and Resources Defining Boundaries</a></li>
<li><a href="#e">Determining Aims, Activities, and Schedule, and Inventing Terminology</a></li>
<li><a href="#f">Devising Structure and Assigning Responsiblities</a></li>
<li><a href="#g">Approaching and Conducting Evaluation</a></li>
<li><a href="#h">Continuing the Partnership: The University Perspective</li>
<li><a href="#i">References</a></li>
</ul>
<h4>
<a href="/articles/">Published Essays and Testimony</a> |
<a href="/">Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</a>
</h4>
<hr/>
<a name="a">
Participants in the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute and I have had the
opportunity elsewhere to describe the concept, operation, and some of the
results of our program (see Vivian, 1985a, 1985b, 1986). We have spoken
about the four principles that have guided the program since its
inception: 1) our belief in the fundamental importance of teaching to
learning in schools and our emphasis on the classroom application of our
collaborative work; 2) our insistence that teachers of students at
different levels interact as colleagues addressing the common problems of
teaching their disciplines; 3) our conviction that teacher leadership is
indispensable to educational reform; and 4) our certainty that
collaborative programs will be truly effective only if they are long-term.
University and school teachers in the Institute have written about what
they have gained from the program. We also have presented the results of
preliminary evaluations of the Institute, which indicate that the program
has increased teachers' knowledge of their disciplines, heightened their
expectations of their students  ability to learn, raised their morale, and
encouraged them to remain in teaching in our local public schools, and
that this, in turn, has improved student learning. <p>
For several years we have been discussing our program with colleagues in
other institutions who have been pursuing the establishment of similar
programs to benefit mutually the schools and universities in their own
communities. During the course of those conversations, I have usually
found ready agreement to the tenets of our approach; discussion turns
quickly to how over time we have put these principles into practice in New
Haven. On occasion, however, I still encounter some of the skepticism that
was particularly evident when we started the Institute. Why, some ask
incredulously, would faculty members at an institution like Yale be
interested in participating in such a program, and, even if they were,
what could they offer to teachers whose students are different from Yale
students in so many respects? Moreover, these skeptics ask, why would Yale
as an institution make a commitment to such a program? In fact, some have
contended that Yale is the least likely of places for such a program to
take root and thrive. Others, ironically, now take the opposite view: Only
an institution with the resources of a place like Yale could possibly
conduct such a program.</p><p>
The present essay affords me an opportunity to
speak more practically and anecdotally about how in 1977 we planned the
Teachers Institute and since then have developed our program. In
reflecting on the past nine years I draw on conversations with colleagues
from other communities. I address some, though certainly not all, of the
issues that are often raised by individuals who are considering how they
might adapt our program to their own educational settings.</p><p>
The scope of this essay does not permit me to treat fully many important
issues in the initial and ongoing development of the program: for example,
the Institute s complete organizational structure and its complex
relationship to the existing structures of the University and the Schools,
or the role that the University, the Schools, and numerous national and
local corporations, foundations, and agencies have played in financing the
program. I have chosen instead to focus on some of the main issues that
school teachers themselves have addressed while shaping the program.
</p></a><center><a name="a"></a><div align="right"><a name="a"></a><p><a name="a">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="b">
<h3>The New Haven Setting</h3>
I should comment initially on our own setting on New Haven, Yale
University, and the New Haven Public Schools so that the reader can
consider the bearing of local circumstances on our particular approach to
collaboration. A qualification, however: during the course of our work
with other communities I have become increasingly convinced that there are
much greater similarities than differences in the opportunities for
educational collaboration in cities across the country. 
<p> In terms of
the proportion of the population living below the federally established
poverty line, New Haven, a city with a population of about 125,000, is the
seventh poorest city in the nation (Rae, 1983, p. l). In our low income
areas, 38.7 percent of residents are l8 years of age or younger. Of the
students attending New Haven's public secondary schools, more than 60
percent come from families receiving public assistance. The percentage of
minority students, mostly Black and Hispanic, enrolled in the New Haven
Public Schools is higher than in 39 of the 46 major urban school districts
surveyed recently by the National School Boards Association. At 83
percent, the rate of minority student enrollment is approximately the same
as that in Chicago and higher than in Baltimore, Miami, Philadelphia,
Birmingham, Cleveland, and St. Louis (National School Boards Association,
1983). Nationally, the percentage of Black and Hispanic students entering
the ninth grade who do not graduate is about twice as great as the
proportion of White students who do not graduate (National Coalition of
Advocates for Students, 1985, p. l0). In New Haven, 45 percent of the
students who enter the ninth grade do not complete high school. 
</p><p> The
total enrollment in the New Haven Public Schools is about l7,000, with
8,200 students attending middle and high schools. While the school system
is therefore "manageably sized" when compared with many of the larger
school districts in the country, it nonetheless has the demographic
features that will increasingly characterize urban public education in the
United States.</p><p> Out of a total of l,200 teachers in the school system,
about 420 teach subjects in the humanities and the sciences at the
secondary level. The annual turnover of these secondary-school teachers,
those potentially eligible to participate in the Institute, is less than 2
percent and is likely to remain at this comparatively low level for at
least the next several years. Only 58.8 percent of these teachers in the
humanities, 38.6 percent in the sciences, and 34.4 percent in mathematics
majored in college or graduate school in the subjects they currently
teach. A high proportion of teachers, particularly those in middle
schools, majored in education.</p><p>
In contrast, Yale has no school or
department of education.  With about 10,700 undergraduate, graduate, and
professional students, a full-time teaching faculty of 698 in the arts and
sciences, and an endowment of more than $1.3 billion, Yale has tremendous
resources for an institution its size. Yale faculty are leading scholars
in their fields, and Yale students are among the best prepared in the
country. Turnover of tenured faculty is low. Among the 5,250
undergraduates, 55 percent attended public schools; 17 percent are
minority students; 82.5 percent graduate within four years of
matriculation. Only 24 current undergraduates are from New Haven. As
Ernest L. Boyer, former U.S.  Commissioner of Education and current
President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching,
wrote in his evaluation of the Institute, It s no secret that the
University and New Haven are two separate worlds.  The challenge is to
find a way for these worlds to meet (198l, p. 5). To put the matter in
general terms, the question in New Haven was how a major cultural
institution located in the center of an urban area might become more
constructively involved in the community where it resides, and upon which
it depends. 
</p>
</a><center><a name="b"></a><div align="right"><a name="b"></a><p><a name="b"> </a><a href="#top">to the top of
the essay</a></p></div></center> <hr/> <a name="c"> 
<h3>Conditions for
Beginning</h3> 
A recognition and articulation of mutual self-interest was,
of course, a necessary first step in establishing the Institute. The role
of altruism, of a sense of civic and social purpose, should not be
underestimated, however. Discussions proceeded simultaneously within two
groups, the teachers of the University and the Schools and their
administrations. That school teachers be centrally involved from the
outset in shaping the program was fundamentally important if the Institute
was to address how we might strengthen teaching and learning in the
classroom. We wanted to empower teachers within the Institute so that
through the program they might gain greater control over the subjects they
teach, the curriculum they use, and the professional activities they
undertake as educators. For these reasons, it was essential that
participation in the program we were planning be voluntary. Just as
teachers themselves would determine much of the nature of the program,
teachers would decide whether they wished to take part in it.<p> There was
a coincidence of several favorable circumstances. Since 1969 teachers from
New Haven secondary schools had worked with members of the Yale History
Department to develop new teaching materials in American history, world
area studies, and urban history. Although involving fewer than twenty
teachers each year, the History Education Project (HEP), forerunner of the
present Institute, enjoyed a good reputation among school teachers and
with the administrations of the University and the Schools. In 1977 the
Secretary of the University, who had responsibility for Yale s community
relations, called HEP "the most solid, the most vital" educational link
between Yale and New Haven. It provided, in fact, one of the few
opportunities for the administrations to meet about a joint undertaking.
HEP had been begun with a grant from the American Historical Association
(AHA), which until 1973 funded a number of projects across the country
concerned with improving the teaching of history in schools. The New Haven
project was continued with local and state support. By 1977 the project
was the only one the AHA had helped establish that was still in existence,
its $l0,000 annual budget provided in equal shares by the University, the
Schools, and our community foundation. This was an example of how, when
there is a financial commitment of the institutions involved when a
program is in the budget it receives attention and is taken seriously.
There was, thus, an eight-year record of a well-regarded relationship
among university and school teachers to which both institutions had a
financial commitment, albeit small. </p><p> Perhaps most important, the
participating school teachers and members of the Yale History Department
had discovered what they stood to gain from working with each other. They
became the nucleus of the groups that planned the present Institute. They
were persuasive, within the University and the Schools, in enlisting
administrative support. They also solicited the interest and gained the
support of their colleagues in their own and other university and school
departments. Because of their previous collaborative experience, they were
credible in convincing their administrations and their teaching colleagues
that such an undertaking would be worthwhile and mutually advantageous.
</p><p> At the risk of making the Institute's history appear merely
serendipitous, I should mention three additional points. A. Bartlett
Giamatti, who had planned to lead the Institute s first seminar in student
writing, became, in 1978, Yale's President; Howard R. Lamar, who as
Chairman of the History Department had been particularly instrumental in
HEP and its evolution into the Institute, became the Dean of Yale College;
and Keith S. Thomson, who assisted with the Institute's later expansion
into the sciences, became the Dean of the Yale Graduate School. Also, the
Institute has been developed since 1978 at a time of unusual harmony and
good will between the University and the Public Schools and the City
administration.  Moreover, the Institute was begun well before the
widespread public attention that since 1983 has been paid to our nation s
public schools.  Far from being subjected to intense scrutiny before we
could begin to have evidence of the results of the program, our problem in
the early years was in obtaining any public recognition at all for
teachers work in the Institute.</p><p> These are among the reasons why I often
observe to colleagues from other institutions that successful
collaborative projects may well begin small, investing real authority in
teacher leadership and developing organically, based on the needs that
teachers identify. In this way, programs are not guided by preconceptions
but grow from their own local conditions. Clear and visible support from
the highest levels of university and school administrations is also
critical, particularly if the collaboration is to be long-term. Tangible
evidence of that commitment is essential.  </p></a><center><a name="c"></a><div align="right"><a name="c"></a><p><a name="c"> </a><a href="#top">
to the top of the essay</a></p></div></center> <hr/> <a name="d">
<h3>Surveying  Needs and Resources: Defining Boundaries</h3> 
For the
administrations of Yale and the Schools, the first questions focused on
which of the Schools' many needs might be most usefully addressed by the
University's resources. In what areas did the Schools have significant
needs and the University complementary strengths? What was central enough
to the mission of both institutions to enable us to construct a real
partnership of allies in league to improve our community s public schools?
Which problems of the Schools were recurring, and which University
resources enduring, so that the program might be of benefit to the Schools
over the longer term? These questions were addressed at a time of enormous
pressures on the budgets of Yale, the City, and the Schools.  Even in
better times, financial resources would never fully match our ambition to
construct a highly productive partnership. In sum, the overriding question
was how we might together apply limited resources in an intensive way
where the need was greatest.<p> We explored these questions in the context
of developing a proposal to the National Endowment for the Humanities
(NEH) to expand the history project, to include additional disciplines in
the humanities, to increase the number of teachers involved, and to make
the new program more demanding.  The NEH did not fund that initial
proposal, but since 1978 has provided strong and continuing support for
the Institute. The development of proposals to NEH and others has
demonstrated that proposal writing itself has certain immediately
beneficial results: it creates a need to clarify and articulate
objectives, and it imposes a timetable and deadline for reaching
decisions. </p><p> Teachers and administrators from the University and the
Schools quickly reached a consensus: The relationship between the
University and the Schools must be both prominent and permanent within any
viable larger relationship between Yale and New Haven, and, of the many
ways Yale might aid New Haven, none is more logical than a program that
shares Yale s educational resources with the Schools. Because of changing
student needs, changing scholarship, and changing educational objectives
set by the school system and each level of government, school curricula
undergo constant revision. Because of Yale s strength in the academic
disciplines, all agreed that developing curricula, further preparing
teachers in the subjects they teach, and assisting teachers to keep
abreast of changes in their fields are the ways that Yale can most readily
assist the Schools.</p><p> The intent was not to create new resources at Yale;
rather, it was to make available in a planned way Yale's existing strength
that is, to expand and to institutionalize the work of university faculty
members with their colleagues in the Schools. Even at this early stage,
both Yale and the Schools sought a course of action that might have a
substantial impact.  The Teachers Institute was established, then, in
1978, as a joint program of Yale University and the New Haven Public
Schools designed to strengthen teaching and thereby to improve student
learning in our community's middle and high schools. That year, the
President of Yale, the Superintendent of Schools, the Mayor of New Haven,
and the Institute Director held a news conference on the program. This was
the first news conference held by the President and the Mayor in over a
decade, and the only one in memory that had been held jointly by the
President and the Superintendent of Schools.  Mayor Frank Logue commented
that the Institute represents "a combined activity that is in the
mainstream of both our enterprises," not something made "out of whole
cloth."</p><p> The Teachers Institute has since become by far the most
comprehensive, intensive, and sustained collaboration of Yale faculty
members with public school teachers. Between 1978 and 1986 the Institute
has offered 57 different seminars in the humanities and arts, the social
sciences, mathematics, and the physical and life sciences. The Institute
has been fortunate in the number of distinguished Yale faculty members who
have become involved in the program; 56 Yale faculty members, many of them
among the most senior members of their departments, have given Institute
talks and led one or more seminars. Between 1978 and 1986, 229 teachers
completed the program successfully from one to nine times. Through the
program, Fellows have developed 463 individual curriculum units which are
widely taught in school courses. Much, however, remains to be done. 
Two-thirds of New Haven secondary-school teachers in the humanities and
the sciences have never participated in the program; of those who have
taken part, two-thirds have participated only once or twice. This is
especially important because evaluations have shown that teachers who
participate in the Institute on a recurring basis, who make the program a
regular part of their professional lives, gain the most.</p><p> Still, one of
the most persistent issues for the Institute is keeping our work sharply
focused where the need is compelling, where we have annually renewable
resources to address that need, and where successfully addressing that
need is demonstrably in the self-interest of both the University and the
Schools. We periodically resurvey the boundaries we fixed in 1978. To give
some sense of both the centrifugal pressures and our limitations, I
mention four examples. They illustrate some of the reasons why we have
retained the Institute s original focus on assisting teachers of the
humanities and the sciences in New Haven s public secondary schools.</p><p>
First, some have suggested that Yale should, either instead of or in
addition to the Institute, work directly with school students, perhaps
with the most academically capable who themselves might later enter Yale. 
Supplementary programs such as the national Upward Bound program have
demonstrated the ways in which university and school teachers can work
together effectively in such programs for students "at risk," and the high
rates at which these students can enter and graduate from college. At
present, in fact, hundreds of Yale faculty members, staff, and students
are active, mostly on a volunteer basis, in a score of supplementary
programs for students from New Haven and other area schools. I stress the
value of such programs, while at the same time distinguishing them from
what the Institute represents. </p><p> Through the Institute we have chosen to
affirm the respective missions of the University and the Schools in terms
of the students each enrolls, and to attend to something intrinsic to
teaching and learning in schools. We have decided against having teachers
from the University and the Schools change place. Also and this is hard to
say judiciously it has sometimes seemed not only presumptuous, but also
potentially demeaning of school teachers, to seek to replace rather than
to assist them in teaching their own students. Most of all, we have wanted
to achieve the greatest impact with available financial resources and with
the limited number of faculty members who in any particular year might be
involved. For example, the same budget might support a given number of
faculty members working intensively either with 80 students, or with 80
teachers and through them the several thousand students in their present
classes, not to mention the students in their future classes. </p><p> Second,
some have urged that we also involve elementary school teachers.  Our
focus on secondary school teachers arises from the fact that they
specialize in one or two academic disciplines. This provides the common
ground for their work with university faculty members. That we have chosen
not to involve elementary school teachers underscores the centrality of
subject matter to our collaboration. </p><p> Third, some have wanted us to
expand the geographic boundaries of the Institute to encompass at a
minimum the schools in neighboring communities, schools which many
university faculty members' children attend. Others would recommend a
perimeter that is statewide, regional, or national, more corresponding to
the geographic range from which Yale draws its own students. Here again we
admit our limitations in terms of faculty and finance, and are convinced
also that in attempting too much we would dilute what can be accomplished
by concentrating on the schools in our own community. In addition, if we
were to expand the program s geography very far, we would have to alter
its schedule, making it a summer and weekend program for only a few
teachers, at most, from any given school. As described below, we believe
that the present year-round schedule has distinct advantages, and that the
program s impact on particular schools is directly related to the
proportion of their teachers we can involve.</p><p> Fourth, there are the
pressures for evaluation and national dissemination of the program, both
of which we accept as important responsibilities, but neither of which
will we allow to detract from our central purpose of assisting teachers in
our community's secondary schools. I return below to some of the numerous
issues surrounding evaluation of the Institute.</p><p> In short, we try to
keep in mind that truisms are among other things true, and that school
reform efforts are often too ambitious, not to mention ephemeral. As
Theodore R. Sizer, Chairman of the Study of High Schools and of the
Education Department of Brown University, wrote in his evaluation of our
program,"The claims for increased scale for the Institute are not
persuasive. Indeed, the arguments for the current scale are powerful. All
too few school reform efforts get the scale right. By remaining small,
focused and uncomplicated, the Institute will serve its purpose admirably"
(1983, p. 3).
</p></a><center><a name="d"></a><div align="right"><a name="d"></a><p><a name="d">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="e">
<h3>Determining Aims, Activities, and Schedule, and Inventing
Terminology</h3>
From the beginning, the teachers in the leadership of the Institute have
been adamant about making the program academically serious, demanding of
participants, attractive to a significant proportion of their colleagues,
and directed at improving the learning of all New Haven middle and high
school students. We therefore had to determine the activities that would
best assist teachers not only in studying a subject, but also in
developing practical approaches for applying their new learning in diverse
school courses. We had to arrive at a schedule that would be manageable
for the largest number of teachers, a schedule that also would be possible
for the university faculty members whom we wished to involve. To make the
program as demanding as feasible, and still to achieve a high level of
participation by New Haven teachers, we had to consider questions of time
and money and other rewards how to balance the rigor of the program with
sufficient incentives that we might realistically make available to
participating teachers. <p>
Most of all, I think, teachers wanted to make the Institute something that
would be both professionally and personally important, in terms of their
own intellectual rejuvenation and growth and their capacity and
effectiveness as teachers. I recall two themes, in particular, from the
earliest conversations: that many of the courses in their preservice
preparation had done little to prepare them for the realities of the
classroom, and that many of the curriculum development projects and in-
service opportunities in which they had been engaged since entering
teaching had been insubstantial and ineffective. To people who talk with
teachers, I suspect these are familiar themes. Teachers spoke of not
wanting to invest a lot of time and effort in yet another short-term
project that would have little or no bearing on their own or other
teachers' classrooms. They were, that is, seasoned but still sanguine and
dedicated, despite past experience. This was reflected in many long, at
times emotional, planning sessions. </p><p>
From the outset we have reached decisions mainly by developing a
consensus. We have thought that the reservations or questions of even one
teacher in the program s leadership must be taken seriously and addressed.
In meetings, although we have taken countless straw polls, the majority
almost never overrules the strong objections of anyone attending. This has
proved an effective procedure for airing and hammering out solutions to
the many real issues in undertaking such a program and for giving teachers
a proprietary interest in it. In this way the teacher leaders developed
the conviction and the enthusiasm that they later passed along to many of
their colleagues. In the course of their discussions, teachers often had
to suspend judgment, to set aside stereotypes and myths about schools and
universities, to explore the assumptions and values that might come to be
shared across the university and school  cultures  described incisively by
Seymour Sarason (197l). Finally, through these discussions we had to adopt
terminology that would reflect their innovative intentions.</p><p>
Though many of the above issues will never be firmly or finally resolved,
I will describe something about how we have dealt with each thus far. It
seemed clear from the outset that, to make the program academically
serious, participating teachers should not passively receive knowledge but
actively engage in its pursuit. In short, everyone would have to come
prepared to discuss a subject and how to introduce it in their own
teaching. And everyone would have to come regularly. Teachers' working
together in small groups seemed the format most conducive to this kind of
exchange, and most likely to challenge and to involve each individual
participant. We decided to call these groups <i> seminars </i> to
distinguish
them from regular <i>courses,</i> a term banned from the Institute
vocabulary
because it connotes a hierarchical, student-teacher relationship.
University faculty members we therefore described simply by their function
in the program as <i>seminar leaders.</i> Participating teachers we
decided to
call <i>Fellows,</i> suggesting their affiliation with the institution as
colleagues, not as students.</p><p>
The specific terms we chose are less important than to note the terms we
were avoiding. We needed to develop a vocabulary that would convey that
teachers from the University and teachers from the Schools were
participating on a par as colleagues in the same disciplines and within
the same profession. We stressed that both brought to the enterprise
something equally valuable to our overall aim of strengthening teaching
and learning in schools. With respect to achieving that aim, the expertise
of university faculty members, as we conceived it, lies especially in
their knowledge of academic subjects, while school teachers  expertise
lies especially in their pedagogical experience, their sense of what will
work for students in their classrooms. Though this distinction is
obviously somewhat arbitrary and artificial, it has served to highlight
the respective strengths and the principal contributions of university
faculty members and school teachers within the context of the program, and
to assign coequal importance to their participation. I will not enter here
the longstanding debate about whether subject matter and pedagogy can or
should be divorced, but will only observe that the formulation we devised
has enabled participants to pursue both simultaneously, has proved
essential to the collegiality on which our program is founded, and has
become central to the program s approach.</p><p>
Teachers decided that the annual program should also include a series of
informal talks by University faculty members. These would acquaint
teachers with faculty members who might later lead seminars on the
subjects of their talks. The talks would provide intellectual stimulation
and would point up interdisciplinary relationships in scholarship and
teaching; they would set a tone for the program. By bringing together
Fellows from all of the seminars, they would give the program coherence
and participants a sense of collective purpose. By placing the talks at
the beginning of the program we might ascertain, in advance of the
seminars' weekly meetings, which teachers were definitely committed to 
participating fully in the program. The talks continue to serve these
purposes, and the teachers in the leadership of the program are determined
to retain them. Nonetheless, the talks are a matter of controversy each
year, and the controversy surrounding them is instructive. Many teachers
would prefer the Institute to schedule more seminar meetings instead,
because in these they are more actively engaged in studying a subject that
is immediately applicable in their own teaching. </p><p>
The interdisciplinary nature of the talks reflects teachers  larger desire
that Institute activities cut across conventional barriers between
departments, disciplines, schools, and levels that the Institute be a
means for overcoming both institutional balkanization and the personal and
professional isolation that, especially in the earlier years of the
Institute, teachers so frequently said they felt. The subjects of
Institute seminars also have combined disciplines in diverse ways,
joining, for example, the study of history with the study of literature,
literature with art, art with history, history with geology, and science
with mathematics. Middle school, high school, and university teachers work
together in these seminars. Teachers from several school departments often
take part in a particular seminar. To give two examples: teachers of
English, foreign language, and bilingual education have participated in
seminars on a particular literary genre such as poetry, drama, or the
short story; teachers of math, history, and art have worked together in
seminars on architecture. The Institute is thus both an interschool and an
interdisciplinary forum where teachers work with one another and with
university faculty members. This has had, further, the practical advantage
of increasing the pool of teachers from which to constitute a seminar
group. It also has increased the adaptability of the materials teachers
prepare in the program for use in a range of school courses and at
different levels.</p><p>
To emphasize the classroom application of participants  reading and
discussion of their reading in the seminars, we decided that each teacher
would write a "curriculum unit," taking a manageable topic within the
seminar subject and developing it for classroom use. Each seminar must
face the challenge of balancing the teachers' further preparation in the
seminar subject with their development of teaching materials for the
classroom. In this way, each seminar addresses the central educational
issue of the connection between the teacher's preparation and students'
learning. Based on our experience with HEP, this was something too vital
to be left to chance. We remain convinced that we cannot simply assume
that the teacher's new knowledge will be effectively conveyed to students.
By requiring the writing of a curriculum unit, we insist that teachers
think deliberately and formally about how what they are learning can be
applied in their own teaching.</p><p>
Fellows prepare their curriculum units in a five-step process, beginning
with a provisional statement of their unit topic on their application to
the program, and continuing throughout the seminar period with a
prospectus, two drafts, and the final writing of the unit. This process
allows a gradual development and enlargement as Fellows think and rethink
their units, and provides for various drafts so that the Fellows and the
seminar leader in each seminar can comment on and contribute to the
work-in-progress (see Vivian, 1986, pp. l8-19).</p><p>
What Fellows write, then,
is not "curriculum" in the usual sense. They are not developing overall
content and skill objectives for each course and grade level, nor are they
preparing day-by day lesson plans for their courses. Institute units also
differ from traditional curricula in form; they are not composed mainly of
lists and outlines of topics to be covered. Rather, teachers research a
topic within the seminar subject and write an essay on that topic and
approaches for introducing it in their teaching. We stress the teacher s
own mastery of the topic together with strategies for teaching it to
students.</p><p>
How we might ensure that the materials teachers write are actually
introduced into their own teaching was a basic issue. Also, we did not
want the Institute to be something concocted by Yale and imposed on the
Schools. For both reasons, the teachers planning the Institute decided
that the seminars should be organized around topics that teachers
themselves had requested, topics on which teachers wanted to work because
they perceived a need to prepare these topics for their own teaching. In
this way, they thought, the introduction of the work of the seminars into
New Haven classrooms would be self-fulfilling. Our experience has borne
this out. As a result, we sometimes ask university faculty members to lead
a collegiality with which everyone in the seminar pursues the subject
together.</p><p>
I come last to the question of scheduling, in part because we placed it
last during our initial planning. We realized that if we placed it first,
we might not get beyond it. We did not want practical questions of
scheduling to dictate what the program would be; we wanted first to
determine what ideally the program should be, and then to consider how we
might make it possible for teachers and Yale faculty members to
participate. Our primary aims in scheduling were twofold: to make the
program as rigorous as possible and still to achieve the highest possible
level of participation by New Haven teachers. We knew that if we made it
so time-consuming that we could meet in a phone booth, the program would
have no influence on schools. The Institute s impact would be roughly
proportional to the number of teachers participating on a recurring basis;
that seemed only common sense. On the other hand, to have a large number
of teachers participating in something insubstantial would also be
ineffectual. We spent a lot of time on the schedule, and we still do. It
is possible to comment here on only a few points from these discussions
that annually test the patience of everyone involved. </p><p>
We quickly decided that the program should not be conducted on a daily,
summer schedule. From our experience with HEP, we knew that we could not
attract a high proportion of teachers if we presented them with a choice
between the Institute and their needs for summer employment and choice
between the Institute and their needs for summer employment and time with
their families. We also knew from experience that the teachers who would
be able to participate on that basis would not be a cross section of New
Haven teachers, and we were determined that Institute Fellows be as
numerous and as representative of all New Haven teachers as possible,
because the education of New Haven students depends upon all their
teachers, not just a select few. In the end, we decided to schedule talks
and seminars in weekly meetings of two hours on the same day each week, so
that people could plan ahead and so that we could work more easily with
school administrators to avoid scheduling conflicts. Tuesday has become
the Institute meeting day, and this is widely known by teachers who have
participated or who are considering participation. In 1978 these weekly
meetings were held over three months; they now span from mid-March until
late July, overlapping the school year in New Haven by more than three
months. By lengthening the program we elongated the period during which
Fellows read in the seminar subject. We also were able to add steps in the
process of writing the curriculum unit, described above.</p><p>
That so much of the program occurs during the school year we regard as a
distinct advantage. Fellows are not participating in an isolated
experience that is removed from the realities of the classroom. Instead,
they come to talks and seminars after a day of teaching and return to
their classes the following morning. In this way they can begin to try out
in their own classes some of the materials and approaches that they
eventually will include in their curriculum units. </p><p>
How, then, having arrived at the aims, activities, and schedule for the
Institute, should we determine the incentives and rewards that would
encourage maximum participation by New Haven teachers? For three reasons
especially it was clear that there should be a stipend. First, we wanted
to cover Fellows' expenses for books, other materials, typing, and travel
without the burdensome paperwork of reimbursing them for each item.
Second, the demands of the program would reduce or preclude for several
months the outside income (from real estate, homebound and after-school
instruction, coaching, and other sources) on which many teachers depend to
support their families. Third, we wanted to underscore that teachers would
participate not just for their own personal benefit but for the ways in
which their participation might over time strengthen education in the
schools. There were dissenting voices, some saying from the Yale side that
taking seminars is what the University usually charges for, not what it
ordinarily pays people to do, and some saying from the Schools  side that
the program would represent only what was already expected of teachers in
terms of curriculum development and planning for their courses. We were
nonetheless convinced that the stipend should be as generous as possible,
for the reasons mentioned above and, even more importantly, because we
wanted to make the program as demanding and professionally important as we
could. We did not want the question of remuneration to limit participation
in the Institute in the way it limits the attractiveness of the teaching
profession in the first place. We also decided that the stipend would be
paid only upon successful completion of the program, which means Fellows
attending and coming prepared to all seminar meetings and talks, meeting
all deadlines in preparing a curriculum unit consistent with Institute
guidelines, and conferring at least twice individually with the seminar
leader to discuss the concept and development of the unit. The teachers in
the leadership of the program are firm about what we term <i> full
participation</i>  by all Fellows. </p><p>
Raising the stipend, only $750 in 1986, is a perennial issue, and its
comparatively low level in relation to the time the program requires
suggests that few teachers participate in the Institute only for the
remuneration. Annual evaluations confirm that it is the seminar experience
itself which most attracts teachers to participate. Also, Fellows have the
opportunity to "publish" what they write in the volume of curriculum units
that the Institute compiles for each seminar; these units are distributed
to all New Haven teachers who wish to use them in their teaching. Fellows
who remain in good standing are for one year full members of the
University community, with full library privileges and access to other
campus facilities and resources, not only those organized through the
Institute. We particularly sought to avoid placing Fellows in any sort of
"second-class citizenship" on campus. Fellows are listed in the university
directory of faculty and staff, which has symbolic meaning in recognizing
them as colleagues and members of the Yale community, and  practical value
in opening institutional resources to them. </p><p>
We also, in time, had to address the relation of teachers  participation
in the Institute to universities  course credit policies and to the
Schools  in service credit policies. The latter proved to be easier to
resolve quickly in that the Schools  administration has usually allowed
teachers to take part in an Institute-sponsored activity in lieu of
attending a regularly scheduled in-service activity. In fact, Institute
Fellows have presented numerous in-service workshops on their units for
other teachers during the city-wide in-service program when teachers are
free to choose which workshops on their units they wish to attend.
Teachers in the leadership of the program have, however, declined to
schedule Institute presentations for in-service activities that other
teachers are required to attend. This is consistent with the voluntary
nature of all Institute activities, the principle that the Institute is
for teachers who have both the interest and the time to take part. It also
is based on the knowledge that teachers attending a required program
are often not a receptive audience. </p><p>
For two years, we largely avoided addressing the issue of university
credit for Institute seminars out of the concern that, if credit were
associated with Institute participation, Fellows and faculty members would
approach Institute seminars as courses, and that this would undermine the
collegial nature of the program. Practically speaking, almost all teachers
in New Haven have permanent positions with the school system, and few are
pursuing an advanced degree. Of those who are, most are taking courses in
education administration or in other subjects to which Institute seminars
do not pertain. Nonetheless, teachers who were taking courses in academic
subjects began to comment that their work in Institute seminars was much
more than equivalent to work in courses they were pursuing elsewhere.
After extended discussions with teachers and within the University
Advisory Council on the Institute, we decided that teachers might petition
for certification of their course of study upon successful completion of
an Institute seminar. Because certification is an after-the-fact
procedure, seminar participants do not know who may later seek course
credit for their Institute participation. In this way we ensure that our
certification policy does not color the seminar experience. Nonetheless,
this allows teachers who are pursuing a degree to present evidence to
institutions where they are enrolled that they have completed a seminar in
the Institute, so that these institutions can then determine whether
teachers" Institute work may be applied toward that degree. </p><p>
We also wanted the Institute to be attractive to Yale faculty members who
might participate as seminar leaders. Whatever the personal and
professional rewards and sense of community service they derive from doing
so and many who have led seminars are eloquent on these points we decided
that their responsibilities to the Institute were roughly equivalent to
teaching a course in the summer; they are compensated accordingly. </p><p>
Some final notes on terminology: Use of the terms <i>teacher</i> and
<i>faculty
member</i> is nettling. Individuals who teach in schools and individuals
who
teach in colleges and universities are certainly both  teachers,  but they
are not both <i>faculty members</i> in the same sense. The differences in
the
power that these two groups of teachers can exercise as faculty members in
their respective institutions are real, and cannot be erased by an
insistent use of language that would indicate the contrary. </p><p>
With respect to <i>collaboration,</i> a buzz-word now used to describe
widely
varied activities, it should be clear that, in New Haven, we mean by the
term something specific. We find it increasingly helpful to use
<i>partnership</i> to describe a formal arrangement between institutions,
and
<i>collaboration</i> to characterize the collegial process of teachers
working
together. In New Haven, then, within a partnership of institutions, there
is a coequal relationship of colleagues, a voluntary association of
teachers who choose to work together. Equal importance is attached to what
each colleague brings to the relationship. </p>
</a><center><a name="e"></a><div align="right"><a name="e"></a><p><a name="e"> </a><a href="#top">to the top
of the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="f">
<h3>Devising a Structure for Teacher Leadership</h3>
In order to practice collegiality in the day-to-day workings of the
Institute, we devised an organizational structure that reflects the
primacy of teachers. We did not wish the program to be dominated
administratively by Yale, nor did we wish to create different classes of
Fellows by involving New Haven school administrators in administrative
roles in the Institute. At the most practical level, we hoped to use peers
to solve problems of absence or lateness, in order to avoid placing the
Yale faculty members in authoritarian roles. Teachers serving in
leadership positions in the Institute have provided a means for solving
these potential difficulties. Through them we have developed and
maintained both rigorous expectations and an accommodating schedule so
that there has been a high level of participation by New Haven teachers. 
That level of participation is attributable largely to the fact that
teachers themselves promote the program in their own schools and recruit
their colleagues as participants. In this capacity, no one can be more
credible than a teacher who is committed to the program and who testifies
from his or her own direct experience about the benefits of participation.
No one from outside the school or in a position other than that of a
full-time classroom teacher could be more effective in convincing teachers
and administrators as well that the Institute can assist them in their own
teaching and that, by extension over time, it can improve teaching and
learning throughout the schools.<p>
I cannot here trace the evolution of the structure for teacher leadership
over the past nine years, but will describe its present form. In each
middle and high school one or two teachers represent their colleagues to
assist with planning, organizing, and conducting Institute activities.
Collectively the School Representatives represent every middle and high
school teacher in the sciences, mathematics, and the humanities. They talk
about the Institute with other teachers in their school and provide them
the opportunity to take part each year in planning the program.
Specifically, the Representatives are responsible for maintaining frequent
contact with, and soliciting the views of, all teachers in their school;
promoting the use of Institute-developed curricular materials by their
colleagues; encouraging teachers to participate as Fellows; and urging
teachers who are not Fellows to attend all activities open to them. School
Representatives must intend to continue as teachers in New Haven s public
middle or high schools, and must participate as Institute Fellows. </p><p>
Institute Coordinators also have an indispensable role. Like the
Representatives, Coordinators must intend to continue as teachers in New
Haven s public schools and must participate as Institute Fellows. Many of
them are long-time Institute participants. Their major responsibilities
include coordinating the activities of the School Representatives; taking
overall responsibility for the recruitment and admissions process; and
assisting with the long-range planning, evaluation, and national
dissemination of the program. They meet at least weekly with the Institute
director during eleven months of the year. </p><p>
Professor Robert Kellogg, Dean of the College at the University of
Virginia and one of our earliest outside evaluators, put the matter well:
</p><blockquote>In order that the "managerial" aspect of the school
administration not be reflected in the operation of the Institute, a small
group of teachers, the Institute Coordinators, serves to  represent  both
the schools in the Institute and the Institute in the schools. The
conception is ingenious, and the individuals who serve as Coordinators
are, more than any other single element, crucial to the Institute's
successful operation. The Coordinators I met were thoughtful and
intelligent men and women who understood the purpose of the Institute and
were effective representatives of the two institutions of which they were
members. (1980, p. 2)</blockquote>
Ernest L. Boyer wrote in his evaluation report:
<blockquote>The project has teacher-coordinators in each participating
school who clearly are committed and who pass on their enthusiasm to
colleagues. One of the most impressive features of my visit was the after
school session I had with these Coordinators from the New Haven schools.
Arriving after a fatiguing day, the teachers turned, with enthusiasm, to
key issues. How can the Institute best help us meet our goals? How can we
improve our work?. . . The dedication and optimism of these teachers was
impressive, almost touching. . . . The significance of teacher leadership
cannot be overstated. (198l, p. 2)</blockquote>
The process of decision making that I have described and that we have
employed in establishing and developing our program, particularly given
the number of teachers involved in leadership roles, is cumbersome and
time-consuming. It requires patience and persistence. It is also, I am
convinced, absolutely necessary if a partnership is to be planned,
organized, conducted, and continued in a genuinely collaborative way. 
</a><center><a name="f"></a><div align="right"><a name="f"></a><p><a name="f"> </a><a href="#top">to the top of
the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="g">
<h3>Approaching and Conducting Evaluation</h3>
One of the most complicated issues facing collaborative educational
programs is that of evaluation, particularly if a stated aim of a program,
as is the case with our Institute, is to improve learning in schools. To
make valid connections between a teacher's participation in the Institute
and students' performance in that teacher's classroom is fraught with
difficulty, not to mention the even greater difficulty of reaching more
general conclusions about the influence of a program on the culture and
social organization of schools. In addition, the type of evidence that one
can appropriately compile about the results of collaborative programs is
sometimes not the kind of evidence that all of its constituents are
seeking. Still, precisely because collaborative programs can achieve only
limited, though important, results, and because of their non-traditional
and often fragile nature, collaborative programs have a special burden of
providing sound evidence of their effectiveness<p>
. Moreover, as the
movement
for university-school collaboration continues to gain momentum across the
country; as this movement becomes more sharply focused on excellence in
teaching in public schools; and as numerous collaborative programs, some
with the Institute's assistance, are being established in other
communities, it is vitally important that we deepen our understanding of
the ways in which such programs can strengthen teaching and learning in
schools. If, in fact, this movement is to be sustained, in New Haven and
elsewhere, collaborative programs must be persuasive about the results
they can achieve. We believe that the Institute therefore has a
responsibility as one of the most visible collaborative programs, as well
as an opportunity as one of the programs of longest duration, to attempt
to make a contribution to educators and policy makers working in the same
vein.
</p><p>
From its inception, the Institute has acted on the belief that ongoing
evaluation by participants and others is indispensable to our educational
experiment. In our view, collaborationthe meeting and talking
togetheris not an end in itself; rather, it is a means of working
together on a task important to both the University and the Schools. This
is not to say that the process of collaboration is irrelevant or
uninteresting, but rather that it should be seen as instrumental. We
should evaluateby which I mean study, describe, and analyzethe
process of collaboration, but this is insufficient. We must also document
and examine the influence of that collaboration on teaching and learning
in schools if we are to make responsible claims that collaboration can
improve the education of students in schools and contribute thereby to
increasing access to educational quality at all levels.
</p><p>
Given, then, both the necessity for and the difficulty in evaluating the
process and results of school-college collaboration, there are numerous
purposes that evaluation serves. Foremost, evaluation can contribute to
the development of the collaboration itself, and should be used
continually to refine both goals and activities. To cite our experience in
New Haven: From the outset, our largest goals have been clear, but through
formal and informal evaluation we have frequently adjusted and readjusted
course to assure that the program remains responsive to the needs of New
Haven teachers and their students. We are always re-examining program
activities and schedule and structure, attempting to do things better, not
just to take stock of what we do and do not do well. Evaluation, then, in
the sense of formal and informal ways of asking participants to
characterize their experiences, to criticize the program, and to assess
its results, is also in itself a means of collaboration. It is a way of
soliciting and then taking seriously the views and suggestions of the
primary beneficiaries of the program, of further involving teachers in
planning for the future.
</p><p>
Evaluation can also reveal not only something about how effective a
program has been in accomplishing what it was intended to do, but also
outcomes that were neither intended nor expected. So, for example, in New
Haven we came through evaluation to a greater appreciation of the bearing
of our Institute on the morale of the teachers who are Fellows in the
program and the ways in which the Institute has aided in retaining them in
our urban school districtissues that are no less significant in New
Haven than they are nationally. </p><p>
Of the many other purposes which
evaluation serves, I would add only one more: its importance in convincing
everyone involved that the program is worthwhile, in gaining and
maintaining the interest and support of participants, of the institutions
involved, of funders. Evaluation is one of the ways to give legitimacy to
what is non-traditional, experimental, or innovative about collaborative
programs. Evaluation therefore directly contributes to the continuation
and institutionalization of practices developed collaboratively. 
</p><p>
As convinced as we are about the importance of ongoing evaluation of
collaborative programs, however, I must mention at least two caveats, two
of the numerous issues that have arisen as we have developed approaches
for evaluating the Institute in New Haven. First is the issue of how much
time can and should be devoted to evaluationwhat is the right
balance to strike between the activities themselves and study of those
activities and their results. This issue has, I think, a special dimension
in school-college collaboration because the traditional, if often
inappropriate and counterproductive, distinction between schools and
colleges has been one of teaching versus scholarship, practice versus
research. There is a whole mythology surrounding that distinction,
including the view that university research has little or no bearing on
improving classroom practicethat in fact school teachers and
students may be exploited only to advance the careers of university
researchers. Evaluation can be mistakenly seen, therefore, as detracting
from rather than contributing to collaboration.
</p><p>
My second point is that evaluation of collaborative programs should be
planned and conducted collaboratively. One must be exceedingly sensitive
in approaching evaluation of such efforts. If programs are to be
collegial, participants must evaluate the programnot the reverse. To
do otherwise, to judge the caliber of individuals' participation in a
collaborative program rather than the overall outcomes of the program, is
inimical to and destructive of collegiality. This means adapting research
techniques and developing new strategies for the evaluation of
collaborative programs, which result in changes that are so often varied
and complex.
</p><p>
Specifically, our evaluation practices thus far have included four
principal activities: review by outside consultants, written evaluation by
participants, surveys of curriculum unit use, and a system-wide study of
the program using lengthy questionnaires with many responses that are
suitable for multivariate analysis. Over at least the next three years we
will conduct a series of new studies on our program. After describing our
past evaluation activities, I will briefly describe those studies.
</p><p>
We have frequently engaged as outside consultants prominent educators
to
visit New Haven and to prepare descriptive and critical reports on the
Institute. In advance of the visit, the consultant is furnished extensive
written materials on our program, including previous evaluations. The
consultant then visits New Haven for two or three days to meet with
participants at the University and the Schools. Some of these visits have
occurred during the school year so that the consultant could observe
Institute Fellows teaching materials they had developed for their own
classrooms. Others have been held while Institute seminars were in session
so that the consultant could observe the work of the seminars. We have
been particularly fortunate to involve as consultants individuals who have
been engaged in recent national studies and reports on American high
schools, who have brought a broad and timely perspective to the task, and
whose favorable reports have been exceedingly helpful in legitimizing and
publicizing the program.
</p><p>
The testimony of Institute participants themselves at the conclusion of
each year's program has been another of the most constructive means of
evaluation thus far; not only has it documented the Fellows' and seminar
leaders' positive opinions of each Institute activity, it has also
resulted in several program refinements based on their criticisms and
suggestions. Each year Institute Fellows and seminar leaders respond to
lengthy questionnaires. In the fall we prepare a digest of Fellows'
comments that is distributed to the Institute Coordinators. The
Coordinators spend several weeks reviewing this document and considering
any changes that should be made in the program for the coming year.
Written evaluation by participants is therefore integral to planning each
year's program.
</p><p>
We also have periodically surveyed all New Haven teachers, those who have
been Fellows and those who have not, concerning their use of the
curriculum units Fellows prepare. The principal aims of these surveys have
been to determine the proportion of current teachers in each of the
academic disciplines the Institute encompasses who have participated in
the program, and to reveal the extent and patterns of use of Institute
developed materials by Institute participants and other teachers in the
schools. We have used the results of these surveys to document the number
of teachers, classes, and students using Institute-developed
materialsto examine the extent of the Institute's influence on
school curricula and classroom instruction.
</p><p>The results of these surveys have shown that the impact of the
Institute is cumulative and has been growing. The most recent such survey,
taken at the end of the 1984-1985 school year, showed that almost
one-third (3l percent) of all individuals who were then teaching the
subjects the Institute addresses in New Haven's public secondary schools
had participated in the Institute one or more times between 1978 and 1984.
The study revealed that most of the teachers who had taken greatest
advantage of the Institute had remained in secondary school teaching in
New Haven, and that in terms of their distribution among school
departments Institute Fellows were highly representative of all eligible
secondary school teachers. The number of school classes in which
Institute-developed units were taughtmore than fifteen hundred
classes with an attendance of more than thirty thousand studentshad
more than doubled since 1982. A third of all New Haven secondary school
teacherswhether or not they had been Fellows of the
Institutehad used Institute-developed units. A high proportion of
units written since 1978 had remained in use, and the use of units did not
depend upon how recently they had been written. The overwhelming majority
of teachers who had used units (over 97 percent) stated that the
curriculum units they had used were both innovative and successful.
</p><p>In 198l we began to develop questionnaires for a more comprehensive
examination of the influence of the Institute on teaching and learning in
New Haven middle and high schools. At the same time, we began more
systematically to review literature in the field of education that was
related to our program. Having searched the literature, we formulated
questions for our study based upon current research findings. The lengthy
questionnaires that resulted were administered in 1982 to all secondary
school teachers in New Haven, whether or not they had participated in the
Institute. In 1987 we will readminister this questionnaire with changes
made at the suggestion of individuals from the Educational Testing
Service. The results of this new system-wide study will provide us with
data about changes in the schools over the life of the Institute and will
serve as a baseline for further studies.
</p><p>
By 1984 the teachers in the leadership of the Institute, among others,
came to believe that, although we had learned a great deal from evaluation
practices used in the past, and although their results had been very
gratifying, the return from these practices was diminishing. The results
were increasingly predictable. Moreover, these practices had proved
insufficient to describing fully the collegial process of our program and
the complicated and subtle educational changes resulting from it. As we
presented the Institute to other educators from across the country, this
became increasingly apparent.
</p><p>
The Institute therefore decided to plan fresh approaches to evaluation.
During the 1984-1985 school year, our National Advisory Committee,
University Advisory Council, and Institute Coordinators worked on
developing a series of studies on the ways in which university-school
collaboration can strengthen teaching and learning in schools, and, in
particular, the bearing of such programs as the Institute on the
preparation, morale, effectiveness, and retention of public school
teachers. The following is an overview of the plans these groups made for
the three new studies which we have now undertaken.
</p><p>
The curricular materials Fellows write are vital to the process of
Fellows' participation in the Institute; they are also products of the
program which it is important that we study, in part because they are used
so widely in New Haven schools. The aim of one new study, a review of the
curriculum units written between 1978 and 1985, is to analyze and describe
both the subjects and the structure of the curriculum units Fellows have
developed in the program. As a first step in reviewing these materials, we
prepared a topical index to the units. The Index of Curriculum units
organizes by subject the first 4l3 units written in the program, making
them more accessible to teachers, who can now readily identify which units
are most applicable to their needs. With the aid of the Index we were able
also to classify the wide range of topics addressed by the Fellows. This
is particularly interesting because university assumptions about academic
freedom prevail in the Institute, and teachers have therefore been at
liberty to work on those topics on which they believe they most need new
materials. The subject-matter categorization of the units reveals the main
areas of Fellows' work in the program and the relative distribution of the
units within seven general categories: art and architecture, language
skills, literature, historical and social studies, psychology and
adolescent development, math and computer science, and general and
technical sciences.
</p><p>
These categories also provided more manageably-sized groupings of units
from which we selected a representative sample for further analysis. The
intent of this deeper analysis is twofold. First, we are examining the
teaching purposes and outcomes that the units envision. This part of the
analysis includes typifying the sources that the authors consulted, the
diversity of teaching styles the authors suggest, the classroom activities
they propose, and the academic competencies and study skills that they
want students to learn. In addition to giving us valuable information
about the units as a whole, this will enable us to ascertain whether these
elements vary according to the subjects being presented.
</p><p>
The information on teaching purposes and outcomes will be particularly
useful for the second immediate aim of the review: to examine how Fellows
have used the Institute guidelines for writing curriculum units. The
guidelines were developed by teachers in the leadership of the program and
represent what they regard to be a highly useful form of curriculum
writing for their own use and use by other teachers. We therefore want to
learn as much as possible about how teachers have approached this
innovative form of curriculum writing. Analysis of the structure of the
units in relation to the guidelines may, for example, reveal that the
guidelines have been interpreted differently in different fields, or
uncover new structural aspects common to the units and thus lead to
refinement of the guidelines. It will also, we hope, yield information
with which we can expand the guidelines to describe the variety of ways in
which teachers have treated structure, as well as voice, audience, social
context, and other matters, in their units.
</p><p>
Furthermore, we want in studying the units to learn more about the special
genre of writing that they represent, a genre that seeks to unite academic
content with pedagogical method. The units reflect a principle of our
program: that teaching strategies must be considered in conjunction with,
not in isolation from, the subject matter to be taught. Just as each
Institute seminar considers not only the seminar subject but also
strategies for teaching that subject in school classes, so also each unit
addresses both the unit topic and how best to convey that topic to
students.
</p><p>
In a second new study we are reviewing retrospectively the responses
university and school teachers have written since 1978 in their annual
evaluations of the program. As mentioned above, we have used these
evaluations by Fellows and seminar leaders to plan the coming year's
program, but we have not before studied this body of information as a
whole. We are particularly interested to reveal by content analysis the
themes in the evaluations and any changes in the themes over the life of
the Institute.
</p><p>
Third, to probe more deeply the value of the program to the institutions
and the teachers involved, we are constructing narrative accounts of the
Institute's work. We hope in this way to study and describe the
collaborative process of the Institutethe colleagueship of
university and school teachers in organizing, conducting, and
participating in the programbetter to depict the educational
innovation it represents. This ethnographic study has been designed to
yield a richly detailed description of the process of participation in the
Institute and of the effects of that process in the careers of the Fellows
and within the New Haven school system. Its form was chosen for its
capacity to produce a systemic view of the Institute. Our goals are better
understanding of the effects of the Institute seminars on the curriculum
of Fellows and non Fellows in New Haven schools; the effects of Institute
participation on the professional morale of the Fellows; the effects of
Institute participation on the Fellows' expectations of their students and
on students' levels of enthusiasm and performance; and the contribution of
the Institute to the retention of teachers in the New Haven school system.
Our research methods, principally observation and open-ended interview,
are intended to complement the objective and essay questionnaires of other
studies. This study, in keeping with other aspects of the Institute
program, has been planned so that the Fellows, the principal subjects, are
active collaborators, contributing to conceptualization of the research
and to the research itself.
</p></a><center><a name="g"></a><div align="right"><a name="g"></a><p><a name="g"> </a><a href="#top">to the top of
the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="h">
<h3>Continuing the Partnership: The University Perspective</h3>
Consistent with the Institute's primary aim of assisting our community's
public schools, the present essay has focused on the development of our
program mainly from the perspective of the involvement of school teachers
and the potential benefits to the Schools. I should return, however, to an
issue mentioned at the outset, and address the benefits of the program to
the University.
<p>
:As President A. Bartlett Giamatti pointed out in an interview on the
December 7, 1980, David Susskind television program, "It is profoundly in
our self-interest to have coherent, well-taught, well-thought-out
curricula" in our local schools and in secondary schools throughout the
country. The Institute and its dissemination are important to Yale in
terms of future students, and also in terms of what faculty members who
lead Institute seminars gain from the program. They increase their
knowledge about public schools and the background of many of their own
students. Many faculty members speak also about how their experience in
the Institute has contributed to their own teaching and scholarship.
</p><p>
The Institute is a most natural way for the University to be involved with
pre-college education, drawing on the University's existing strength and
tradition of academic excellence. In the absence of a school or department
of education, the Institute serves as a center for faculty from throughout
the institution who care deeply about both public education and the New
Haven community and who wish to have a practical and constructive
involvement. In the past, the Institute has drawn its faculty from both
Yale College and the Graduate School and the Schools of Architecture, Art,
Divinity, Forestry and Environmental Studies, Law, and Medicine.
The Institute is also of unquestioned value with respect to the
University's relationship with New Haven. Yale's future and New Haven's
are bound together in important ways. The Institute represents what Yale
as an educational institution most has to offer New Haven. It has become a
principal bridge between the University and the City, part of the
educational and human infrastructure of our community. It is an alliance
of the University and Schools, together with the City administration,
business, and labor in our community.
</p><p>
Since the beginning of the Institute, the New Haven Federation of Teachers
has been highly supportive of the program because of the ways in which it
advances teachers' interests. In the New Haven business community, many
executives recognize that a strong public school system fulfills a basic
need for employees, their families, and the community generally. These
executives see that the quality of our public schools is vitally important
for attracting and retaining corporations in New Haven, and that it is
linked to economic development, to the tax base, and to the economic
health of our community and region. They see that the school system is a
major factor in families' decisions about where to live, and where they
therefore pay taxes and purchase goods and services. Not only is the
monetary support of these corporations for the Institute important, the
corporate executives with whom we have worked also have become more
knowledgeable about the positive developments in our schools. In that
these individuals are leaders in our community, by involving them in
improving our schools we can foster greater public support for public
education.
</p><p>
As Ernest Boyer wrote in his evaluation of the program,
</p><blockquote>
The Institute is an educational venture and when measured on this
yardstick it has been a great success. However, I cannot avoid observing
that the project is a political success as well. It has put a human face
on the University, opened doors, and focused resources where they are
needed most. The University has gained enormously from the Institute and I
conclude that for both educational and community reasons the program
should be nurtured and sustained. (198l, p. 4)
</blockquote>
These are among the reasons the partnership became an institutional
priority for Yale. Initially, the Institute was supported in part out of
discretionary funds at Yale from the President's Office and the Office of
Community and State Relations. In time, however, the Institute received
its own departmental budget, in spite of the fact that the University was
then experiencing severe financial constraints and was making reductions
in faculty and in other areas. The University budget for the program has
been increased periodically, and this has been a potent symbol of the
institution's commitment to the program.
<p>
In 1984, President Giamatti commissioned the University Council on
Priorities and Planning to examine Yale's relations with the City of New
Haven. The Council chose to address three areas of the "town-gown"
relationship; the dominant of these was public education. The Council
wrote:
</p><blockquote>Yale's principal mission is education. Thus, it seems only
natural that Yale concentrate its community efforts upon helping the local
public schools meet the enormous challenge of preparing a significantly
poor and undereducated population to compete successfully in America's
increasingly technical job market. The benefits of a stronger school
system extend, moreover, beyond the students assisted directly. Improved
public schools provide greater neighborhood stability, make the community
a more attractive place to live and create a positive environment for
business investment. Both the City and Yale gain appreciably once this
process has set in. (1984, pp. 26-7)
</blockquote>
The Institute assumed a prominent position in the Council's discussion of
the University's involvement with public education. The Institute, the
Council wrote, "deserve[s] to be expanded and sufficiently funded with the
University's active assistance to ensure that [it] remains a permanent
component of Yale's efforts to improve public education in New Haven."
First among the Council's recommendations was their statement that a $4
million endowment should be established for the Institute.
<p>
Our present endowment campaign underscores our deep belief in the long
term significance of the Teachers Institute to the University, to our
local public schools, and to our community generally. We hope also that,
because our program addresses in microcosm some of the most pressing
problems of urban public education, its continuation can contribute to
collaborative work between universities and schools in other places. The
campaign represents our determination to demonstrate that collaborative
programs can be not only developed but also sustained, so that they can
have a lasting effect.
</p></a><center><a name="h"></a><div align="right"><a name="h"></a><p><a name="h"> </a><a href="#top">to the top of
the essay</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="i">
<h3>References</h3>
Boyer, Ernest L. 1981.An Evaluation of the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute. Unpublished report.<p>
Council on Priorities and Planning. 1984. <i>Report of the Council on
Priorities and Planning, 1983-1984.</i> New Haven: Yale University.
</p><p>
Kellogg, Robert. 1980. <i>An Evaluation of the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute.</i> Unpublished report.
</p><p>
National Coalition of Advocates for Students. 1985. <i>Barriers to
Excellence: Our Children At Risk. </i>Boston: National Coalition of
Advocates for Students.
</p><p>
National School Boards Association. 1983. <i>A Survey of Public Education
in the Nation's Urban School Districts.</i> Washington, D.C.: National
School Boards Association.
</p><p>
Rae, Douglas. 1983. <i>The Extent, Distribution, and Causes of Poverty in
New Haven: Phase I Report of the Special Commission on Poverty.</i> New
Haven: City of New Haven.
</p><p>
Sarason, Seymour B. 1971. <i>The Culture of the School and the Problem of
Change. </i>Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
</p><p>
Sizer, Theodore R. 1983. "An Evaluation of the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute." Unpublished report.
</p><p>
Vivian, James R. 1985a.<i> Teaching in America: The Common Ground. </i>New
York: College Board.
</p><p>
Vivian, James R. 1985b. "Empowering Teachers as Colleagues." In William T.
Daly (Ed.), <i>Sourcebook on High School-College Collaboration. </i>San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
</p><p>
Vivian, James R. 1986. "Yale University: Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute." In Ron Fortune (Ed.), <i>School-College Collaborative Programs
in Writing and Literature.</i> New York: MLA.
</p></a><center><a name="i"></a><div align="right"><a name="i"></a><p><a name="i"> </a><a href="#top">to the top of
the essay</a></p></div></center>
</main>