---
layout: page
title: Yale University The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
path: /articles/C7.html
---
<main>
      <div class="container region-content">
        <div class="row">
          <div class="col-sm-9 mt-3">
            <h2 class="page-title title">
              Yale University: The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
            </h2>
            <p class="article_author">By James R. Vivian</p>
            <div class="article_table_contents">
              <p class="article_table_contents_header">Contents:</p>
              <p>
                <a href="#a">
                  Background
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a href="#b">
                  The Program
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a href="#c">
                  The Institute's Governing Principles
                </a>
              </p>
              <p>
                <a href="#d">
                  Recommendations
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="a"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">Background</h3>
              <p>
                As early as 1980 two national panels issued their findings on
                the state of student learning in the humanities and the
                sciences: a joint National Science Foundation-Department of
                Education study spoke of "a trend toward virtual scientific and
                technological illiteracy" (ix) and the Commission on the
                Humanities concluded that "a dramatic improvement in the quality
                of education in our elementary and secondary schools is the
                highest educational priority in the 1980s" (25). The commission
                called for curricula to teach children to read well, to write
                clearly, and to think critically. They also found that "the need
                to interrelate the humanities, social sciences, science and
                technology has probably never been greater than today" (6).
              </p>
              <p>
                National problems in secondary education are no less important
                to Yale than to universities generally, and Yale's reasons for
                becoming involved in seeking solutions transcend altruism or a
                sense of responsibility to the New Haven community. As Yale
                president A. Bartlett Giamatti pointed out in an interview on
                the David Susskind television program on 7 December 1980, "it is
                profoundly in our self-interest to have coherent, well-taught,
                well-thought-out curricula" in our local schools and in
                secondary schools throughout the country. Yale acted on such a
                view in 1970, when the history department began the History
                Education project (HEP), which assisted a number of New Haven
                social studies teachers in developing improved curricula for
                courses in American history, world area studies, and urban
                studies.
              </p>
              <p>
                The success of HEP led to discussions about organizing a more
                ambitious and demanding program that would include additional
                disciplines. Teachers and administrators from the university and
                the schools quickly reached a consensus: the relationship
                between the university and the schools must be both prominent
                and permanent within any viable larger relationship between Yale
                and New Haven, and of the many ways Yale might aid New Haven
                none is more logical or defensible than a program that shares
                Yale's educational resources with the schools. Because of
                changing student needs, changing scholarship, and the changing
                objectives set by the school system and each level of
                government, school curricula undergo constant revision. Because
                of Yale's strength in the academic disciplines, all agreed that
                the university could most readily assist the schools by
                developing curricula, further preparing teachers in the subjects
                they teach, and helping teachers keep abreast of changes in
                their fields.
              </p>
              <p>
                Our intent was not to create new resources at Yale; rather, it
                was to make available in a planned way our existing strength,
                that is, to expand and institutionalize the work of university
                faculty members with their colleagues in the schools. Even at
                this early stage, both Yale and the schools sought a course of
                action that might have a substantial impact. The superintendent
                of schools and the board of education asked that the expansion
                of the program begin with the addition of seminars in English,
                the subject in which they saw the greatest need. The objective
                was eventually to involve as many teachers as possible and to
                include a range of subjects that would span the humanities and
                sciences, so that the program might address the school
                curricula, and thus students' education, broadly. In 1978, then,
                the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute was established as a joint
                program of Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools,
                designed to strengthen teaching and thereby to improve student
                learning in the humanities and the sciences in our community's
                middle and high schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="b"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">The Program</h3>
              <p>
                From the outset, teachers have played a leading role in
                determining how Yale and the school system together can help
                them meet all their students' needs, not only the needs of
                students who later will enter college. The institute seeks to
                involve all teachers who state an interest in any of the
                seminars and who can demonstrate the relation of their institute
                work to courses they will teach in the coming year. The
                institute does not, then, involve a special group of teachers
                who teach a special group of students; rather, it is an
                intensive effort to assist teachers throughout the school
                system, grades 7 through 12.
              </p>
              <p>
                Each year about eighty New Haven school teachers become fellows
                of the institute to work with Yale faculty members on topics the
                teachers themselves have identified. Many of the university's
                most distinguished faculty members have given talks and led
                seminars in the program. Seminar topics have included geology,
                the environment, medical imaging, Greek civilization,
                architecture, the arts and material culture, the American
                family, and a variety of topics in literature, history, and
                culture. The materials that the fellows write are compiled into
                a volume for each seminar and distributed to all New Haven
                teachers who might use them. Teams of seminar members promote
                widespread use of these materials by presenting workshops for
                colleagues during the school year.
              </p>
              <p>
                Culminating with the fellows' preparation of new materials that
                they and other teachers will use in the coming school year, the
                institute's intensive program lasts 4-1/2 months and includes
                talks, workshops, and seminars. The talks are intended to
                stimulate thinking and discussion and to point up
                interdisciplinary relationships in scholarship and teaching.
                Presenting institute guidelines for curriculum units, the
                workshops explore the fellows' own approaches to writing a
                curriculum unit and stress the audience for whom fellows are
                writing: other teachers. The seminars have the related and
                equally important purposes of increasing the fellows' background
                and developing new curriculum materials on the seminar subjects.
                As a group, fellows study the general seminar subject by
                discussing common readings; individually, each fellow selects a
                more limited aspect of the subject and researches and develops
                it in depth for classroom use. Each seminar must balance these
                complementary, but in some ways distinct, activities.
              </p>
              <p>
                In applying to the institute, teachers describe the topics they
                most want to develop; Yale faculty members circulate seminar
                proposals related to these topics; and teachers who coordinate
                institute activities in the schools, after canvassing their
                colleagues, ultimately select which seminars will be offered. In
                effect, New Haven teachers determine the subject matter for the
                program each year. Because English is the largest department in
                the schools, a high proportion of teachers, requests have been
                for seminars on language and literature; nineteen of the
                forty-three seminars the institute has offered have been in this
                area. These seminars may be categorized as studies of a
                particular genre, interdisciplinary approaches to history and
                literature, thematic approaches to literature, and approaches to
                teaching writing. Teachers of languages other than English have
                frequently participated, and two interdisciplinary offerings
                were organized specifically for Spanish and bilingual-education
                teachers.
              </p>
              <p>
                In an early seminar, Strategies for Teaching Literature, led by
                James A. Winn, the members as a group discussed a variety of
                literary genres, and each fellow individually researched and
                wrote on a particular genre. Other seminars have concentrated
                exclusively on a single genre. Readings in the Twentieth-Century
                Short Story, led by james A. Snead, considered the unique form
                of the short story, various styles, and questions of
                interpretation, especially those related to the teaching of
                literature. Thomas R. Whitaker twice led a seminar on drama. In
                his first seminar, members addressed a range of pedagogical
                strategies involving drama: how dramatic improvisation can
                increase students' motivation for studying the language arts,
                how it can provide a context for exploring the situations of
                bilingual and black students or of adolescents as a group, and
                how nonverbal performance can be a useful preparation for
                engaging a text. In a second seminar on drama, the fellows
                explored the implications of assuming that, even in a classroom,
                a play is best read as a "score for performance." they engaged a
                variety of plays, sampled some theater games and exercises, and
                shaped their group work so that it would encompass each of the
                curriculum units the fellows were preparing. Autobiography, a
                seminar led by Richard Brodhead, considered autobiography both
                as a literary form and as a human act. Participants looked at
                some distinguished examples of autobiographical writing and
                discussed ways in which the study of autobiography could provide
                the focus for a program in student writing.
              </p>
              <p>
                Each of the genre seminars emphasized how best to introduce
                middle and high school students to the genre, how to relate what
                students would study to their own experience, and how,
                simultaneously, to encourage various forms of student
                expression. As Brodhead wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                While our seminar was reading classic writings and discussing
                abstract questions about autobiography, our concern was always
                with what this study could yield for New Haven high- and
                middle-school students, and specifically with how it could help
                develop their powers of verbal expression. This concern is
                constantly reflected in the units, each of which uses
                autobiography as the basis for a program of student writing. Our
                idea, in making autobiography the matrix for writing
                assignments, is to connect the often troubled act of writing
                with a broad activity of communication that students are already
                competent at and comfortable in. But while they draw on this
                reservoir of existing communicational skills, the units do not
                promote casual or uncontrolled self-expression as an end in
                itself. Rather they aim to use autobiographical self-expression
                to make students more conscious of the nature and power of
                expression, as well as to promote the forms of
                self-discovery--that new knowledge of who we are, where we came
                from, what matters to us, and why--that the writing of
                autobiography can produce.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Institute seminars with an interdisciplinary approach have
                combined the studies of history, literature, and culture.
                Society and the Detective Novel, led by Robin W. Winks, examined
                the transfer of the American Western novel" to the asphalt of
                the city, showing how detective and, to a lesser extent, spy
                fiction reveals the nation's preoccupations. Drawing on the
                visual arts as well as literature, An Interdisciplinary Approach
                to British Studies, also led by Winks, explored recent
                approaches to English literature in connection with recent
                trends and new interpretations in modern British history. The
                "City" in American Literature and Culture, led by Alan
                Trachtenberg, explored the usefulness of the category "city" or
                "urban" in the teaching of American cultural history. Drawing
                from readings in fiction, poetry, social theory, and urban
                history, as well as from knowledge of their students'
                backgrounds and needs, seminar members attempted to reconcile
                the detached view of the scholar with the more practical, urgent
                view of the citizen. Twentieth-Century American History and
                Literature, an early seminar, was divided into three sections,
                one on American domestic affairs, led by Richard W. Fox; one on
                foreign policy, led by Henry A. Turner; and one on the feminine
                experience revealed in various forms of literature, led by
                Cynthia E. Russett. In the Afro-American Culture of the
                Twentieth Century, led by Charles T. Davis, seminar members
                studied, comparatively, black and white literary traditions and
                historical accounts of the experiences of blacks and Italians in
                New Haven; examined origins of the black migration from the
                South and of the black ghetto in the Northern city; and
                investigated qualities in AfroAmerican achievement that were
                distinctly black--always, however, with a concern for a debt to
                the host American culture.
              </p>
              <p>
                Two seminars in literature took a thematic approach. Adolescence
                and Narrative: Strategies for Teaching Fiction, led by Ross C.
                Murfin, examined ideas held by adolescent characters and the way
                these characters relate to, reflect, or oppose the surrounding
                culture. In the broadest sense, the seminar considered the
                relationship between adolescence and fiction: what fiction can
                reveal about adolescence; whether, in fact, novels with
                adolescent protagonists most often represent some difficult
                human condition other than adolescence. The Stranger in Modern
                Fiction: A Portrait in Black and White, led by Michael G. Cooke,
                considered the idea of human freedom in such contexts as family
                history, political and legal systems, financial need, social
                customs, nature, personal failure, and myth. The Oral Tradition,
                also led by Cooke, explored the relation between the oral
                tradition and the civilization in which it is developed in three
                literary environments: classical Greek poetry and drama, British
                poetry and German folktale, and black American fiction.
              </p>
              <p>
                The institute has offered a series of four seminars on the
                teaching of writing. In the first of three seminars entitled
                Language and Writing, discussions were based largely on the
                members' work in Progress. The seminar leader, James A. Winn,
                remarked,"No synthesis or consensus emerged from these sessions;
                indeed, many of the differences in theory and practice between
                the participants may now be more sharply defined and more deeply
                felt than they were. But I can state confidently as the seminar
                leader that the marks and dents of all that vigorous shoptalk
                are visible on every unit." the seminar the following year, led
                by thomas R. Whitaker, was intended for teachers who were
                preparing curricula dealing with some aspect of grammar,
                reading, speaking, or writing. In a third seminar, again led by
                Winn, common readings included material on rhetoric and
                linguistics, and fellows were encouraged to design a curriculum
                unit substantially unlike anything they had done before. The
                fourth seminar on writing, Writing Across the Curriculum, led by
                Joseph W. Gordon, involved teachers from all disciplines, not
                only English. They investigated both current research on the
                composition process and teaching methods that grew out of that
                research, and they drew up model assignments for getting
                students to write more often without a proportional increase in
                the teacher's work. As Gordon wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                The seminar out of which these units developed engaged in
                spirited and extended disputes that, we hope, clarified the
                differences among us. There are units here that regard writing
                as a means, and others that regard it as an end in itself. There
                are units that advocate the use of drills, and others that
                instead use poetry and art to teach syntax and vocabulary. Some
                units suggest using haiku, others suggest writing postcards and
                letters, and one even speaks of the advantages of formal
                outlining. Some concentrate exclusively on techniques for
                developing the students' self-confidence and creativity. There
                are units here for teaching writing in the history and science
                class, as well as in English and foreign language classes. And a
                few units address students for whom English is a second language
                or who are classified as Developmentally Disabled. There are, in
                short, strategies here for almost any student in the middle or
                high school. Out of all this variety, we hope, the thoughtful
                and energetic teacher may discover, or just rediscover, a reason
                and a motive for "assigning more writing."
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                For all fellows, whether in English or in other disciplines,
                working on writing and on the teaching of writing is a central
                purpose and activity of the institute. Almost two-thirds of them
                have stated that the process of writing an institute curriculum
                unit improved their own writing, and over three-fourths have
                reported that the experience improved their ability to teach
                writing effectively--whatever their field. To fulfill the
                requirements of the program, each fellow must prepare a
                curriculum unit of at least fifteen pages containing four
                elements: (1) objectives--a clear statement of what the unit
                seeks to achieve; (2) strategies--a unified, coherent teaching
                plan for those objectives; (3) classroom activities--three or
                more detailed examples of teaching methods or lesson plans; and
                (4) resources--three annotated lists: a bibliography for
                teachers, a reading list for students, and a list of materials
                for classroom use. The discussion of objectives and strategies
                must be in prose and must constitute at least two-thirds of the
                completed unit.
              </p>
              <p>
                What fellows write, then, is not "curriculum" in the usual
                sense. They are not developing content and skill objectives for
                each course and each grade level, nor are they preparing
                day-by-day lesson plans for their courses. Institute units also
                differ from traditional curricula in form; they are not composed
                mainly of outlines of topics to be covered. Instead, teachers
                research and discuss in writing some aspect of the seminar
                subject that they will use in their own teaching.
              </p>
              <p>
                Fellows develop their curriculum units in six stages, each a
                month apart. Initially, in applying to the institute, teachers
                describe the topic they wish to develop and its relation to
                school courses. At the second meeting of the seminar, each
                fellow, having consulted with the seminar leader and other
                seminar members, presents a refined statement of his or her
                topic and a list of basic readings for research. Each then
                writes, based on preliminary research, a two- to four-page
                prospectus that describes what the final unit will contain and
                that provides all seminar members with an overview of their
                colleagues' work. The next stage is the first draft of the
                statement of each unit's objectives and strategies, which is
                distributed and discussed in the seminars. A second draft
                includes the revised statement of the objectives and strategies
                of the unit and a first draft of the unit's other elements. The
                completed unit is due about three weeks after the seminar's
                final meeting. At each stage, fellows receive written comments
                from the seminar leader as well as responses from other teachers
                in the seminar, a part of the audience for whom fellows are
                writing.
              </p>
              <p>
                The institute, in short, regards the preparation of curriculum
                units as a process, and this concept is widely understood and
                accepted by the fellows. One participant wrote that "the process
                provided a comfortable format, a logical progression of reading,
                thinking, and writing." A veteran fellow wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                After five years' experience, I find the process for unit
                writing a very balanced, flowing process. The more experienced a
                unit writer I become, the more convinced I am of the necessity
                and wisdom of the stages of the writing process. The prospectus
                gives the Fellow the momentum to move from the reading to the
                writing stage, although it does not necessarily curtail the
                continued research; the first and second drafts give the author
                an opportunity to refine his presentation.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                From a university faculty member's point of view, Brodhead
                wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                The system of repeated drafts for the curriculum units was
                especially important in my seminar: I was very rigorous in my
                evaluation of the early drafts, and I was insistent that Fellows
                work at strengthening and clarifying what was weak and vague in
                those drafts; and I'd have to say that they without exception
                faced the challenges I set them, and moved, draft by draft,
                toward a much more significant. and much more fully-articulated,
                proposal. Touchingly, many of them said that it had been years
                since anyone took their work seriously enough to criticize it;
                in any case, the way they use the seminar leaders comments as a
                means to a fuller grasp of their own thinking was enormously
                impressive to me.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                <a   
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
            <div class="article-row">
              <a name="c"></a>
              <h3 class="article-section-header">
                The Institute's Governing Principles
              </h3>
              <p>
                Four principles, all implanted in the first institute in 1978,
                and each shaped over time by experience, guide the program and
                constitute much of its distinctiveness. They are (1) our belief
                in the fundamental importance of the classroom teacher and of
                teacher-developed materials for effective learning; 2) our
                insistence that teachers of students at different levels
                interact as colleagues, addressing the common problems of
                teaching their disciplines; (3) our conviction that any effort
                to improve teaching must be teacher-centered and our consequent
                dependence on the institute coordinators, teachers in each
                school who meet weekly with the director and who constitute an
                essential part of the program's leadership; and (4) our
                certainty that the university can assist in improving the public
                schools only if we make a significant and long-term commitment
                to do so.
              </p>
              <p>
                The institute differs from conventional modes of curricular
                development. Classroom teachers, who best know their students'
                needs, work with Yale faculty members, who are leading scholars
                in their fields. The institute does not develop curricula on
                certain topics only because these topics are important in recent
                scholarship; rather, it brings knowledge to the assistance of
                teachers in areas they identify as their main concerns. The
                institute involves no "curriculum experts" in the usual sense,
                who would themselves develop new materials, train teachers in
                short-term workshops to use these materials, and then expect the
                materials to improve classroom teaching. Instead, the institute
                seeks to demonstrate that intensive and long-term collaboration
                between a university and its neighboring school system--between
                schoolteachers and university scholars--can produce curriculum
                materials of high quality that pertain to student needs and can
                significantly influence teaching and learning in the schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                By writing a curriculum unit, teachers think formally about the
                ways in which what they are learning can be applied in their own
                teaching; we emphasize that the institute experience must have
                direct bearing on their own classes. In the end, their units
                reflect both the direction provided by the Yale faculty members
                and their own experience in the classroom, their sense of what
                will work for students.
              </p>
              <p>
                This balance between academic preparation and practical
                classroom application--as well as the depth and duration of our
                local collaborative relationship--are the central features of
                the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. Our outside evaluator in
                1980, Robert Kellogg, pointed out:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                That Yale does not have a school or department of Education is
                in this instance a blessing. Without an intermediary buffer,
                softening, exaggerating, or explaining away the contrast of
                intellectual milieu between secondary education and higher
                education, the two groups of teachers (the Institute Fellows and
                the Yale faculty) are free to explore for themselves the extent
                to which they share values and assumptions about their subject
                and its role in the development of children's minds and
                characters.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                The institute is the only interschool and interdisciplinary
                forum enabling schoolteachers to work with one another and with
                Yale faculty members. In referring to the collegial spirit of
                the program, we are speaking of a dynamic process that brings
                together individuals who teach very different students at
                different levels of their subjects and who bring to the program
                a variety of perspectives and strongly held points of view. The
                tensions and disagreements that arise from these different
                perspectives are a source of vitality and innovation. Each
                challenges the preconceptions of the other, with the result that
                university faculty members understand something more about
                teaching at the secondary level while schoolteachers often
                reconsider their expectations of their students' ability to
                learn. With our emphasis on the authority of the secondary
                school teacher, the bond between fellows and Yale faculty
                members is one of mutual respect and a shared commitment to the
                best education for New Haven students.
              </p>
              <p>
                The institute is organized to foster this sense of collegiality.
                Fellows are not students paying tuition for regular
                graduate-level courses. Instead, they are remunerated, each
                fellow receiving an honorarium on successful completion of the
                program. As full members of the Yale community, fellows are
                listed in the university directory of faculty and staff; this
                symbolizes our recognition of them as colleagues and has the
                practical value of making Yale resources readily accessible to
                them. Through the institute, teachers gain access to human and
                physical resources throughout the university, not only to those
                specifically organized by the institute.
              </p>
              <p>
                Also contributing to the collegiality is the informal, flexible
                style of the seminars--a tradition established by the first
                group of Yale faculty members who taught in the program and
                maintained by some continuity of faculty and by faculty meetings
                with the coordinators and the director. This makes the institute
                utterly unlike the graduate-level courses in education most of
                the fellows have taken and often unlike the graduate seminars
                most of the Yale faculty members ordinarily teach.
              </p>
              <p>
                To practice collegiality in the day-to-day workings of the
                institute, we devised an administrative structure that would
                reflect the primacy of teachers. We did not wish the program to
                be something concocted by Yale and imposed on the fellows, nor
                did we wish to create different classes of fellows by involving
                New Haven school administrators in administrative roles in the
                institute. At the most practical level, to avoid placing the
                Yale faculty members in authoritarian roles, we hoped to use
                peers to solve problems of absence or lateness. The coordinators
                have provided a solution to all these potential difficulties.
                Again, Kellogg's report puts the matter well:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                In order that the "managerial" aspect of the school
                administration not be reflected in the operation of the
                Institute, a small group of teachers, the Institute
                Coordinators, serves to "represent" both the schools in the
                Institute and the Institute in the schools. The conception is
                ingenious, and the individuals who serve as Coordinators are,
                more than any other single element, crucial at the Institute's
                successful operation. The Coordinators I met were thoughtful and
                intelligent men and women who understood the purpose of the
                Institute and were effective representatives of the two
                institutions of which they were members.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Through the coordinators, who collectively represent every
                middle and high school teacher in the humanities and in the
                sciences, teachers are directly involved in the cyclical
                planning, conduct, evaluation, and refinement of the program.
                Through them we have developed and maintained both rigorous
                expectations and an accommodating schedule, so that there has
                been a high level of participation by New Haven teachers.
                Between 1978 and 1983 forty percent of the New Haven secondary
                school teachers in the humanities and the sciences successfully
                completed at least one year of the institute. The participants'
                evaluation of the program confirms the crucial role of the
                coordinators; one fellow wrote, "as long as there are teacher
                Coordinators, the program will belong to all the participants."
                This proprietary feeling of teachers toward the institute, the
                feeling that it is "teacher-centered," is essential to our
                success.
              </p>
              <p>
                To participate in so demanding a program, teachers must believe
                that the institute can assist them in their own teaching and
                that, by extension, it can eventually improve teaching and
                learning throughout the schools. Our evaluator in 1981, Ernest
                L. Boyer, wrote in his report:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                The project has teacher-coordinators in each participating
                school who clearly are committed and who pass on their
                enthusiasm to colleagues. One of the most impressive features of
                my visit was the after school session I had with these
                Coordinators from the New Haven schools. Arriving after a
                fatiguing day, the teachers turned, with enthusiasm, to key
                issues. How can the Institute best help us meet our goals? How
                can we improve our work? . . . The dedication and optimism of
                these teachers was impressive, almost touching. . . . The
                significance of teacher leadership cannot be overstated.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Using common sense, we know that the impact of the institute
                will be roughly proportional to the number of teachers who
                participate on a recurring basis. The institute's influence on
                teachers' preparation and curricula is cumulative; we must
                annually involve a large enough proportion of New Haven teachers
                to be credible in claiming that their participation can improve
                the public schools. Each curriculum unit a teacher writes
                represents only a fraction of all he or she teaches, and the
                very nature of the academic disciplines and their teaching is
                not static but constantly changing. Should the institute ever
                become so limited in scope or duration as to appear trivial, it
                would cease to attract a sizable percentage of New Haven
                teachers and would become ineffectual. In one of its principal
                recommendations the Commission on the Humanities concluded:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                Because schools change slowly, we endorse models of
                school-college collaboration that emphasize long-term
                cooperation. We recommend that more colleges or universities and
                school districts adopt such programs for their mutual benefit,
                and that funding sources sustain programs and administrative
                costs on a continuing basis. programs of school-college
                collaboration offer the best opportunity to strengthen
                instruction in the schools while providing intellectual renewal
                for teachers. (56)
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                As our evaluator last year, Theodore R. Sizer, noted, "Such
                renewal does not come quickly. It benefits from sustained
                contact, from supportive conditions, from simmering." It is
                therefore most encouraging that, after five years of developing
                the Teachers Institute as a model of university-school
                collaboration, Yale decided to seek a $4 million endowment to
                give the program a secure future.
              </p>
              <p>
                Yale and New Haven together have supported a major share of the
                total cost of the Teachers Institute. A considerable portion of
                our remaining need has been met through strong and continuing
                support from the National Endowment for the Humanities. We have
                been pleased also to receive operating funds from numerous
                foundations and corporations--including more than fifty local
                businesses that see our efforts to improve the education of all
                young people in the area as a good form of community
                development. The present endowment campaign underscores our deep
                belief in the long-term significance of the Teachers Institute
                for the university and for our community's public schools. It
                also represents our determination to demonstrate that effective
                collaborative programs can be not only developed but sustained.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a              
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
              <div class="article-row">
                <a name="d"></a>
                <h3 class="article-section-header">Recommendations</h3>
                <p>
                  There is, in my view, no more important recommendation in the
                  Carnegie Foundation{' '}
                  <i>Special Report on School and College</i> than the
                  one--contained also in the Carnegie report <i>High School</i>
                  --that calls for universities and schools to develop genuine
                  partnerships based on the needs of schools as determined by
                  their principals and teachers. Both aspects of that
                  recommendation are essential: not only that universities and
                  schools work together but especially that those of us in
                  higher education encourage our colleagues in the schools to
                  show us the ways we can marshal our resources to address their
                  needs.
                </p>
                <p>
                  I would offer the following guidelines for the successful
                  implementation of the Carnegie recommendation:
                </p>
                <ol>
                  <li>
                    Collaboration is a term currently used to describe quite
                    varied activities. I mean by the term something specific.
                    Collaboration arises from a recognition of mutual interest
                    between school and college--between city and college--that
                    must become more widespread if we are to improve our public
                    schools. To be authentic a partnership should be a coequal
                    relationship of colleagues, a volunteer association of
                    individuals who choose to work together, of allies in league
                    to improve our schools. Equal importance must be attached to
                    what each partner brings to the relationship. The aim is to
                    have teachers work together without having to change places.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    Because institutional and other resources are never
                    adequate, an early step in establishing a collaborative
                    program is a assess the resources that can be made available
                    to meet the needs of schools and then to apply these
                    resources in an intensive way where the need is greatest.
                    Institutional support must come from both sides of the
                    partnership; tangible and visible evidence of such
                    commitment is essential.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    We especially need to encourage partnerships between schools
                    and universities that concentrate on teaching and on the
                    continuing engagement of teachers with their fields.
                    Cooperative efforts should insist on a direct application in
                    school classrooms.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    A tendency in establishing collaborative programs--indeed in
                    school reform efforts generally--is to be too ambitious.
                    programs will succeed only if they have well-defined and
                    manageable goals; they should avoid making impossible
                    claims.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    Precisely because each collaborative project can achieve
                    only limited, though important, results, participants must
                    be confident that their efforts are worthwhile. An ongoing
                    evaluation process is therefore integral to a program's
                    design and should be used perennially to refine both goals
                    and activities. Because collaborative programs are often
                    seen, unfortunately, as nontraditional--because they may not
                    be regarded as central to the mission of either
                    partner--they have a special burden of providing good
                    evidence of their results.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    The most successful projects may well begin small, investing
                    real authority in teacher leadership and developing
                    organically according to the needs teachers identify. In
                    that way, programs are not guided by preconceptions but grow
                    from their own local experience. Efforts at school
                    improvement will not succeed without teacher leadership. In
                    this country we have for too long held teachers responsible
                    for the condition of our schools without giving them
                    responsibility--empowering them--to improve our schools.
                  </li>
                  <li>
                    For all the above reasons and--I cannot overemphasize this
                    point--for the benefits to be lasting, collaborative
                    programs must be long-term.
                  </li>
                </ol>
                <p>
                  Not all teachers are sanguine about the prospects for public
                  secondary education. But the vision of our institute, which
                  many share, is that the problems confronting us are not
                  intractable and that teachers, working through the institute,
                  can improve the education and the lives of their students. By
                  assigning greater prestige and power to schoolteachers and by
                  engaging them in study and writing about their disciplines,
                  the teachers Institute implicitly questions whether teaching
                  in school and teaching in college should be regarded as
                  markedly different. The educational levels and institutions in
                  this country are not discrete and separable compartments but
                  parts of a whole educational process, for teacher and student
                  alike. Continuing study and writing about a subject benefit
                  schoolteachers no less than their university colleagues. In
                  both cases, their students are the ultimate beneficiaries.
                </p>
                <p>
                  <a              
                    href="#"
                    id="backtotop"
                    class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                    role="button"
                    aria-pressed="true"
                  >
                    Back to Top <i class="fas fa-arrow-up"></i>
                  </a>
                </p>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </main>