---
layout: page
title: Partnerships and the Community
path: /articles/C8.html
---
 <main>
      <div class="container region-content">
        <div class="row">
          <div class="col-sm-9 mt-3">
            <h2 class="page-title title">Partnerships and the Community</h2>
            <p class="article_author">
              Participants
              <i>
                James R. Vivian, Director, Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
              </i>
              <i>Alyce P. Hall, Director, Cities in Schools, NYC</i>
              <i>
                Daniel M. Merenda, Executive Director, National School Volunteer
                Programs
              </i>
              <i>
                Moderator: James Gaddy, Superintendent, New Rochelle City School
                District
              </i>
            </p>
            <div class="article-row">
              <h3 class="article-section-header">VIVIAN:</h3>
              <p>
                Collaboration between college and university faculty members and
                school teachers is essential for strengthening teaching and
                learning in tile nation s schools and is therefore indispensable
                to education reform in this country.
              </p>
                <p>
                I would therefore like to speak briefly about the principles of
                our program in New Haven, its history and concept, and its
                significance to Yale University. There are four principles that
                have guided our program since its inception ten years ago:
                First, our belief in the fundamental importance of teaching to
                learning in schools and our consequent emphasis on the classroom
                application of our collaborative work. Second, our insistence
                that teachers of students at different levels interact as
                colleagues by addressing the common problems of teaching their
                disciplines. Third, our conviction that teacher leadership is
                inseparable from successful education reform. Fourth, our
                certainty that collaborative programs will be truly effective
                only if they are long-term.
              </p>
                <p>
                For several years we have been discussing these principles of
                our program with colleagues from other institutions across the
                country who leave been pursuing the establishment of similar
                programs to benefit mutually the schools and universities in
                their own communities. On occasion, I must admit, I still
                encounter some of the skepticism that was especially evident
                when we began our program in New Haven. Why, some still ask
                incredulously, would faculty members from an institution like
                Yale, be interested in participating in such a program? And even
                if they were, what could they possibly offer to teachers whose
                students are different from Yale students in so many respects?
                Moreover, these skeptics ask, why would Yale as an institution
                make a commitment to such a programs In fact, some have even
                contended that Yale is the least likely of places for such a
                program to take root and thrive. Others now ironically take the
                opposite view: that only an institution with the resources of a
                place like Yale could possibly undertake such a program. I think
                that last view is simply wrong. During the course of our work
                with other communities, I have become increasingly convinced
                that there are much greater similarities than differences in the
                opportunities for educational collaboration in cities and towns
                across the country.
              </p>
              <p>
                <p>
                With respect specifically to New leaven, as Ernest Boyer wrote
                in his evaluation of our program, "It is no secret that the
                University and New Haven are two separate worlds. The challenge
                was to find a way for these two worlds to meet." To put the
                matter in general terms, I would say the question in New Haven
                was how a major cultural institution located in the center of an
                urban area, which happens to be the seventh poorest city in the
                country, might become more constructively involved in the
                community where it resides and upon which it depends in so many
                ways.
              </p>
                <p>
                That school teachers be centrally involved from the outset in
                shaping the program was fundamentally important if the institute
                was to address how we might strengthen teaching and learning in
                the classroom. We wanted in effect to empower teachers within
                our institute so that through the program they might gain
                greater control over the subjects they teach, the curriculum
                they use and the professional activities they undertake as
                educators. For these reasons it was essential that participation
                in the program we were planning be voluntary. Just as teachers
                themselves determine much of the nature of the program, teachers
                decide whether they wish to take part.
              </p>
              <p>
                There was, when we began the program, the coincidence of several
                favorable circumstances. Most importantly I would mention that
                since 1969, teachers from New Haven high schools and faculty
                members from the University s history department had worked
                together in a small project The History Education Project, which
                was a forerunner of the present institute, a program that
                enjoyed a good reputation among school teachers and the
                administrations of the University and the Schools. The
                participating school teachers and members of Yale's history
                department had discovered what they stood to gain from working
                together, and they became the nucleus of the groups that planned
                our present program. These are among the reasons why I often
                observe to colleagues from other institutions that successful
                collaborative projects may well begin small, investing real
                authority in teacher leadership and developing organically,
                based on the needs that teachers identify. In this way, programs
                are not guided by reconceptions but grow from their own local
                conditions. Clear and visible support from the highest level of
                university and school administrations is also critical in my
                view, particularly if a collaboration is to be long term.
                Tangible evidence of that commitment is essential.
              </p>
              <p>
                For the administrations of Yale and the Schools, the first
                questions focused on which of the Schools' many needs might be
                most usefully addressed by the University s resources. In what
                areas did the Schools have significant needs and the University
                have complimentary strengths? What was central enough to the
                missions of both institutions to enable us to construct a real
                partnership of allies in league to improve our community s
                public schools? Which problems of the schools were recurring and
                which University resources enduring so that the program might be
                of benefit to the schools over the longer term? These questions
                were addressed at a time of enormous pressure on the budgets of
                the university, the city and the schools. But even in better
                times, financial resources would never match fully our ambition
                to construct a highly productive partnership.
              </p>
              <p>
                In sum, at the beginning the over-riding question we faced was
                how we together might apply limited resources in an intensive
                way where we deemed the need was greatest. Teachers and
                administrators from the university and the schools quickly
                reached a consensus on these questions. The relationship, they
                thought, between the university and the schools must be both
                prominent and permanent within any larger viable relationship
                between Yale and New Haven. And of the many ways Yale might aid
                New haven, none was more logical than a program which shares
                Yale's educational resources with the schools. Because of
                changing student needs, changing scholarship, changing
                educational objectives, set perennially by the school system and
                each level of governments school curricula undergo constant
                revision. Because of Yale's strength in the academic
                disciplines, on the other hand, all agreed that developing
                curriculum, further preparing teachers in the subjects they
                teach, and assisting teachers to keep abreast of changes in
                their fields are the ways that Yale can most readily assist the
                schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                The intent, then, was not to create new resources at the
                University. Rather it was to make available in a planned way
                Yale s existing strength- that is, to expand and to
                institutionalize the work of university faculty members with
                their colleagues in the schools. The Teachers Institute has
                since then become by far the most comprehensive, intensive, and
                sustained collaboration of Yale faculty members with school
                teachers. Between 1978 and 1986, the Institute offered 57
                different seminars in the humanities and the arts, social
                sciences, mathematics and physical and life sciences. We have
                been fortunate in the number of Yale faculty members who have
                become involved in the program. Many or them are among the most
                senior members of their departments. Fifty-six individuals leave
                given talks and led one or more Institute seminars. During that
                same nine-year period, about 225 teachers completed the program
                successfully from 1 to 9 times each. Through the program they
                have developed more than 45() individual curriculum units which
                are widely taught in more than 1500 school courses in New Haven.
              </p>
              <p>
                <p>
                Much, however, remains to be done. Just in New Haven, two-thirds
                of New Haven's secondary school teachers in the humanities and
                the sciences have never participated in our program, and of
                those who have taken part, two thirds have participated only
                once or twice. This is especially important, I think, because
                evaluations of our program have shown that teachers who have
                participated in the Institute on a recurring basis, who make the
                program a regular part of their professional lives, gain the
                most.
              </p>
                <p>
                Still, one of the persistent issues for our Institute is keeping
                our work sharply focused where the need is compelling, where we
                have annually renewable resources to address that need, and
                where successfully addressing that need is demonstrably in the
                self interest of the university and the schools. So we
                periodically, annually or even more often, resurvey the
                boundaries we set for the program in 1978. As we do so, however,
                we try to keep in mind that truisms are, among other things,
                true, and that school reform efforts are often too ambitious,
                not to mention, too ephemeral. As Theodore Sizer, currently
                chairman of the Education Department at Brown University, wrote
                in his evaluation of our program: "The claims for increased
                scale of the Institute are not persuasive. Indeed the arguments
                for current scale are powerful. All too few school reform
                efforts get the scale right."
              </p>
                <p>
                From the beginning the teachers in the leadership of our
                Institute have been adamant about making the program
                academically serious, demanding of the participants, attractive
                to a significant proportion of their colleagues and directed at
                improving the learning of all New Haven middle and high school
                students. We therefore had to determine the activities that
                would best assist teachers, not only in studying the subject but
                also in developing practical approaches for applying their new
                learning in their own very diverse school courses. We had to
                arrive at a schedule that would be manageable for the largest
                number of teachers, a schedule that would also be possible for
                university faculty members whom they wished to involve. To make
                the program as demanding as feasible and still to achieve a high
                level of participation by New Haven teachers, we also had to
                consider questions of time and money and other rewards. We had
                to consider how to balance the rigor of the program with
                sufficient incentives that we might realistically make available
                to participating teachers.
              </p>
                <p>
                With respect to collaboration , then, I stress that in New Haven
                we mean by the term something highly specific. In New Haven,
                within a partnership of institutions there is a collegial
                relationship among colleagues a voluntary association of
                teachers who choose to work together and bring talents to the
                relationship.
              </p>
                <p>
                Let me return finally to the issue I mentioned at the outset and
                address briefly the benefits of our program to the university.
                As A. Bartlett Giamatti, Yale's former president pointed out in
                an interview early in the history of our program "It is
                profoundly in Yale's self interest to have coherent well taught
                well thought out curricula in our local schools and in secondary
                schools across the country. The Institute and its dissemination,
                therefore are important to Yale not only in terms of our own
                future students but also in terms of what Yale faculty members
                who lead Institute seminars themselves gain from the program.
                They increase their knowledge about public schools and the
                background therefore of many of their own students. Many faculty
                members speak also about how their experience in the Institute
                has contributed to their own teaching and scholarship. The
                Institute, then, is a most natural and logical way for our
                university to be involved in pre-college education drawing on
                the university's existing strength and tradition of academic
                excellence. In the absence of a school or department of
                education the Institute serves then as a center for faculty from
                throughout the institution who care deeply about public
                education in this country and in the New Haven community and who
                wish to leave a practical and constructive involvement. The
                Institute is also of unquestionable value with respect to the
                university's relationship with New Haven. Yale s future and New
                Haven s are bound together in many important ways. The Institute
                represents what Yale as an educational institution most has to
                contribute to New Haven. It is an alliance of the university and
                the schools together with the city administration, business and
                labor in our community. "
              </p>
                <p>
                As Ernest Boyer also wrote in his evaluation of our program "The
                Institute is an educational venture and when measured on that
                yardstick it has been a great success. "However I cannot avoid
                observing " he said "that the project is a political success as
                well. It has put a human face on the university opened doors and
                focused resources where they are needed most."These are among
                tile reasons that the partnership became an institutional
                priority for Yale and among the reasons why Yale's current
                president Benno C. Schmidt Jr. has pledged his strong support
                for securing an adequate endowment so that the Institute will be
                a permanent part of the educational and human structure of the
                New Haven community and of the larger education community
                nationally."
              </p>
                <p>
                Finally I must state my strong concern that the collaborative
                movement nationally address in particular the education of
                students from minority groups and low income families. You have
                no doubt heard stated previously and I am sure will again in the
                course of this conference the concern of many working in this
                field that the current education reform movement not erode but
                rattler that it advance the gains which those groups made during
                the previous fifteen to twenty years. You are familiar I am sure
                with the demographic changes we face in public education and in
                the nation - for example that minority students are becoming a
                larger proportion of the total student population in this
                country. Yet some of the warning signs have already been posted.
                For example black students who are an increasing proportion of
                the total student population are at the same time going on to
                college in decreasing numbers. In my view the future of public
                education depends on our success in serving student groups that
                have traditionally not been well served by our nation s schools
                and colleges. That I think, therefore, must be a fundamental and
                pervasive concern in our collaborative work.<p>
              </p>
                <p>
                In our own Institute then we have two basic commitments. First,
                a commitment to school-college collaboration and more
                specifically to collaboration among school teachers and
                university faculty members working together as colleagues as one
                of the most necessary and vital means of strengthening teaching
                and learning in the nation's schools and colleges. Second a
                commitment not only to excellence in education at all stages of
                the educational process, but also inseparably a commitment to
                ensuring that all students have equal opportunity for and access
                to that excellence. I want to suggest today in fact that these
                two are really one: that what we seek through the educational
                process is to prepare and enable all students to fulfill their
                own promise and thereby our promise as a diverse people. In the
                end I think that is the real collaboration which we seek: a
                capacity for and a disposition to a process of working together
                on an equal basis in the larger society. That is why I believe
                our work as colleagues in collaborative programs is so urgently
                important.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  role="button"
                  aria-pressed="true"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up" />
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </main>
