---
layout: page
title: Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
path: /articles/T1.html
---
<main>
      <div class="container region-content">
        <div class="row">
          <div class="col-sm-9 mt-3">
            <h2 class="page-title title">
              Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools: Yale-New Haven
              Teachers Institute
            </h2>
            <p class="article_author">by James R. Vivian</p>
            <div class="article-row">
              <p>
                During the past year our country's public schools have received
                unprecedented national attention. Much of what has been said
                about the condition of public education has been highly
                critical, grimly portraying the quality of our 86,000 public
                schools. However, one encouraging result of this intensified
                scrutiny of our schools has been a renewed appreciation of ways
                in which communities can develop partnerships to improve their
                schools. In particular, the spotlight has been focused on the
                growing movement toward university-school collaboration. One of
                the highest educational priorities for the l980s and beyond,
                many analysts agree, is for schools and colleges to work
                together at the local level to improve the quality of elementary
                and secondary education.
              </p>
              <p>
                Of all the ways schools and colleges might collaborate, there
                are no programs more important than those that concentrate on
                excellence in teaching. Many observers of our schools single out
                the present "crisis" in teaching as foremost among the problems
                of secondary schools. The reasons for the present concern about
                teaching in our schools are increasingly familiar: issues of
                prestige, power, pay, and preparation for teachers. Based upon
                my experience with the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, I
                believe that the means for addressing some, though not all, of
                these problems are in our hands and within our power.
                School-college collaboration, though certainly not a panacea for
                all that afflicts our schools, can improve teaching in our
                schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                The interplay of our schools and colleges has, of course, been a
                theme in the history of American education. During the rise of
                universal secondary education and the growth of higher education
                in America, colleges have had a vested interest in the prior
                education of their students. Higher education has served to
                shape secondary school curricula through admissions
                requirements, and college faculty have written curricula and
                textbooks for use directly in schools. Schools have sought to
                know the content of college courses so that they might prepare
                their students for college studies. Some colleges have muted the
                distinction between secondary and higher education by the early
                enrollment of high school students in college offerings,
                sometimes for credit, either on campus or in schools. Probably
                most important, higher education has provided the initial
                preparation, and often continuing education, for the individuals
                who teach in our schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                Over the past century some of the most influential analysts of
                our schools have emphasized the continuing engagement of
                teachers with the subjects they teach. In a series of
                widely-read essays published in l892, Joseph M. Rice argued that
                "teachers must constantly endeavor to grow both in professional
                and in general intellectual strength." Having observed schools
                in thirty-six cities, Rice concluded, "by far the most progress
                has been made in those cities where the teachers themselves are
                the most earnest students . . . [I]t is, after all, the teacher
                that makes the school." That same year, under President Charles
                W. Eliot, Harvard University instituted free courses for
                Cambridge teachers in new subjects in the sciences. The
                following year, writing for the Committee of Ten, Eliot asserted
                that the changes the Committee recommended depended on teachers
                more highly trained during their initial preparation and while
                in service. The Carnegie Report of l920 on The Professional
                Preparation of Teachers spoke of the importance of "regular
                periods of uninterrupted study" for teachers because "the
                present vitality of the school is directly involved." In l945
                the authors of the Harvard Report, General Education in a Free
                Society, stated that "there is no educational reform so
                important as the improvement of teaching," and that the greatest
                of the schools' needs was "a more rounded, longer, more
                continuing education of teachers." In l963 James B. Conant's The
                Education of American Teachers recommended especially continuing
                study and in-service education for teachers.
              </p>
              <p>
                Most recently, in the Carnegie Report on High School, Ernest L.
                Boyer called for greater emphasis on subject matter in the
                initial preparation of the teacher, and for "a planned
                continuing education program... [as] part of every teacher's
                professional life." As Boyer later wrote in commenting on the
                numerous education studies and reports issued in l983, "We are
                beginning to see that whatever is wrong with America's schools
                cannot be fixed without the help of those teachers already in
                the classrooms. Most of them will be there for years to come,
                and teachers must be viewed as part of the solution, not as part
                of the problem."
              </p>
              <p>
                National demographic trends, even though they obscure
                significant state and regional differences, demonstrate the
                particular importance of Boyer's observation for the l980s. The
                decline in enrollment in public secondary schools, which began
                in the l970s, will continue into the early l990s. While the
                reduced demand for teachers resulting from falling enrollment
                was initially offset by an improved ratio of teachers to
                students, during the l980s this ratio will improve at a much
                slower rate. The proportion of teachers who leave the profession
                each year, which dropped to six percent in l973, will continue
                at this lower level. The total number of secondary school
                teachers will therefore continue to decline through the l980s;
                the average annual demand for these teachers will be thirty
                percent less than in the l970s. New college graduates, who
                represented nine percent of all school teachers in l971,
                constituted only two percent of teachers in l982.
                <sup>
                  <a id="text_1" name="text_1"></a>
                  <a href="#note_1">
                    1
                  </a>
                </sup>{' '}
                In short, the secondary education of a generation of the
                nation's young people will be mainly in the hands of individuals
                presently teaching. To improve secondary education in the l980s
                we must therefore strengthen the teaching of those individuals
                already in, and now entering, the profession.
              </p>
              <p>
                These national trends are pronounced in New Haven. In other
                ways, too, a profile of the New Haven Public Schools resembles
                that of many American secondary schools, especially those in
                urban areas: More than sixty percent of secondary students in
                the New Haven Public Schools come from families receiving some
                form of public assistance; eighty-three percent are either Black
                or Hispanic; forty-five percent of those entering the ninth
                grade do not graduate. Absenteeism and the high mobility of
                students among schools impair the ability of teachers to plan a
                logical sequence for learning in their courses. The turnover of
                teachers presently is only two percent, and about half of New
                Haven secondary teachers teach subjects in which they did not
                major in college or graduate school. Many report, not
                surprisingly, that teaching has become more stressful.
              </p>
              <p>
                As early as l980 two national panels isssued their findings on
                the state of student learning in the humanities and the
                sciences: A joint National Science Foundation/Department of
                Education study spoke of "a trend toward virtual scientific and
                technological illiteracy," and the Commission on the Humanities
                concluded that "a dramatic improvement in the quality of
                education in our elementary and secondary schools is the highest
                educational priority in the l980s." The Commission called for
                curricula to teach children "to read well, to write clearly, and
                to think critically." They also found that "the need to
                interrelate the humanities, social sciences, science and
                technology has probably never been greater than today."
              </p>
              <p>
                These problems are no less important to Yale than national
                problems in secondary education are to universities generally,
                and Yale's reasons for becoming involved transcend altruism or a
                sense of responsibility to the New Haven community. As Yale
                President A. Bartlett Giamatti pointed out in an interview on
                the December 7, l980, David Susskind television program, "it is
                profoundly in our self-interest to have coherent, well-taught,
                well-thought-out curricula" in our local schools, and in
                secondary schools throughout the country. Yale acted upon such a
                view in l970, when the History Department began the History
                Education Project (HEP), which assisted a number of New Haven
                social studies teachers in developing improved curricula for
                courses in American history, world area studies, and urban
                studies.
              </p>
              <p>
                The success of HEP led to discussions about organizing a more
                ambitious and demanding program which would include additional
                disciplines. This was a specific response to the general
                question, How can institutions located in center-city areas
                become constructively involved in addressing problems of the
                communities where they reside, and on which they depend? The way
                that Yale and New Haven answered this question, we believed,
                might be of value to universities and school systems elsewhere.
              </p>
              <p>
                Teachers and administrators from the University and the Schools
                quickly reached a consensus: The relationship between the
                University and the Schools must be both prominent and permanent
                within any viable larger relationship between Yale and New
                Haven, and, of the many ways Yale might aid New Haven, none is
                more logical or defensible than a program that shares Yale's
                educational resources with the Schools. Because of changing
                student needs, changing objectives set by the school system and
                each level of government, and changing scholarship, school
                curricula undergo constant revision. Because of Yale's strength
                in the academic disciplines, all agreed that developing
                curricula, further preparing teachers in the subjects they
                teach, and assisting teachers to keep abreast of changes in
                their fields were the ways that Yale could most readily assist
                the Schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                The intent was not to create new resources at Yale; rather, it
                was to make available in a planned way our existing strength,
                that is, to expand and institutionalize the work of University
                faculty members with their colleagues in the Schools. Even at
                this early stage, both Yale and the Schools sought a course of
                action that might have a substantial impact. The Superintendent
                of Schools and Board of Education asked that the expansion of
                the program begin with the addition of seminars in English, the
                subject in which they saw the greatest need. The objective was
                eventually to involve as many teachers as possible and to
                include a range of subjects that would span the humanities and
                sciences, so that the program might address the school
                curricula, and thus students' education, broadly. The Teachers
                Institute was established, then, in l978 as a joint program of
                Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools, designed to
                strengthen teaching and thereby to improve student learning in
                the humanities and the sciences in our community's middle and
                high schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                From the outset, teachers have played a leading role in
                determining how Yale and the school system together can help
                them all meet their students' needs, not only the needs of
                students who later will enter college. The Institute seeks to
                involve all teachers who state an interest in one of our
                seminars and who can demonstrate the relation of their Institute
                work to courses they will teach in the coming year. The
                Institute does not, then, involve a special group of teachers
                who teach a special group of students; rather, it is an
                intensive effort to assist teachers throughout the school
                system, grades seven through twelve.
              </p>
              <p>
                Each year about eighty New Haven school teachers become Fellows
                of the Institute to work with Yale faculty members on topics the
                teachers themselves have identified. Many of the University's
                most distinguished faculty members have given talks and led
                seminars in the program. Seminar topics have included geology,
                the environment, medical imaging, Greek civilization,
                architecture, the arts and material culture, the American
                family, and a variety of topics in literature, history, and
                culture. The materials that Fellows write are compiled into a
                volume for each seminar and distributed to all New Haven
                teachers who might use them. Teams of seminar members promote
                widespread use of these materials by presenting workshops for
                colleagues during the school year.
              </p>
              <p>
                Culminating with the Fellows' preparation of new curricular
                materials that they and other teachers will use in the coming
                school year, the Institute's rigorous four-and-one-half month
                program includes talks, workshops, and seminars. The talks are
                intended to stimulate thinking and discussion and to point up
                interdisciplinary relationships in scholarship and teaching.
                Presenting Institute unit guidelines, the workshops explore the
                Fellows' own approaches to writing a curriculum unit and stress
                the audience for whom Fellows are writing: other teachers. The
                seminars have the related and equally important purposes of
                increasing Fellows' background and developing new curriculum
                materials on the seminar subjects. As a group, Fellows study the
                seminar subject generally by discussing common readings;
                individually, each Fellow selects a more limited aspect of the
                subject, and researches and develops it in depth for classroom
                use. Each seminar must balance these complementary, but in some
                ways distinct, activities.
              </p>
              <p>
                In applying to the Institute, teachers describe topics they most
                want to develop; Yale faculty circulate seminar proposals
                related to these topics; and teachers who coordinate Institute
                activities in the schools, after canvassing their colleagues,
                ultimately select which seminars will be offered. In effect, New
                Haven teachers determine the subject matter for the program each
                year. A high proportion of teachers' requests have been in
                language and literature because English is the largest
                department in the schools; nineteen of the forty-three seminars
                the Institute has offered have been in this area. These seminars
                may be categorized as studies of a particular genre,
                interdisciplinary approaches to history and literature, thematic
                approaches to literature, and approaches for teaching writing.
                Teachers of languages other than English have frequently
                participated in our genre, thematic, and writing seminars, and
                two interdisciplinary offerings were organized specifically for
                Spanish and bilingual education teachers.
              </p>
              <p>
                In an early seminar, Strategies for Teaching Literature, led by
                James A. Winn, Associate Professor of English, the members as a
                group discussed a variety of literary genres, while each Fellow
                individually researched and wrote on a particular genre. Other
                seminars have concentrated exclusively on a single genre.
                Readings in the Twentieth Century Short Story, led by James A.
                Snead, Assistant Professor of English and Comparative
                Literature, considered the unique form of the short story,
                various styles, and questions of interpretation, especially
                those related to the teaching of literature. Thomas R. Whitaker,
                Professor and Chairman of English, twice led a seminar on Drama.
                In his first seminar, members addressed a range of pedagogical
                strategies involving drama: how dramatic improvisation might
                increase students' motivation for study of the language arts,
                how it may provide a context for exploring the situations of
                bilingual and Black students or of adolescents as a group, and
                how non-verbal performance can be a useful preparation for
                engaging a text. When Professor Whitaker led a second seminar on
                Drama, the Fellows explored the implications of assuming that,
                even in a classroom, a play is best read as a "score for
                performance." They engaged a variety of plays, sampled some
                theatre games and exercises, and shaped their group work so that
                it would encompass each of the curriculum units being prepared
                by the Fellows. Autobiography, led by Richard H. Brodhead,
                Associate Professor of English, considered the nature of
                autobiography both as a literary form and as a human act.
                Seminar members looked at some distinguished examples of
                autobiographical writing and discussed how the study of
                autobiography could provide the focus for a program in student
                writing.
              </p>
              <p>
                In each of these genre seminars, there was an emphasis on how
                best to introduce middle and high school students to the genre,
                how to relate what students would study to their own experiences
                and how, simultaneously, to encourage various forms of student
                expression. As Professor Brodhead wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                "While our seminar was reading classic writings and discussing
                abstract questions about autobiography, our concern was always
                with what this study could yield for New Haven high- and
                middle-school students, and specifically with how it could help
                develop their powers of verbal expression. This concern is
                constantly reflected in the units, each of which uses
                autobiography as the basis for a program of student writing. Our
                idea, in making autobiography the matrix for writing
                assignments, is to connect the often troubled act of writing
                with a broad activity of communication that students are already
                competent at and comfortable in. But while they draw on this
                reservoir of existing communicational skills, the units do not
                promote casual or uncontrolled self-expression as an end in
                itself. Rather they aim to use autobiographical self-expression
                to make students more conscious of the nature and power of
                expression, as well as to promote the forms of
                self-discovery--that new knowledge of who we are, where we came
                from, what matters to us, and why--that the writing of
                autobiography can produce."
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Institute seminars with an interdisciplinary approach have
                combined the studies of history, literature, and culture.
                Society and the Detective Novel, led by Robin W. Winks,
                Professor of History, examined the transfer of the American
                "Western novel" to the asphalt of the city, showing how
                detective, and to a lesser extent spy fiction reveals the
                nation's preoccupations. Drawing upon the visual arts as well as
                literature, An Interdisciplinary Approach to British Studies,
                also led by Professor Winks, explored recent trends and new
                interpretations in modern British history, and recent approaches
                to English literature. The "City" in American Literature and
                Culture, led by Alan Trachtenberg, Professor of American Studies
                and English, explored the usefulness of the category "city" or
                "urban" in the teaching of American cultural history. Drawing
                from readings in fiction, poetry, social theory and urban
                history, as well as their knowledge of their students'
                backgrounds and needs, seminar members attempted to reconcile
                the detached view of the scholar with the more practical, urgent
                view of the citizen. Twentieth Century American History and
                Literature, an early seminar, was divided into three sections,
                one on American domestic affairs, led by Professor Richard W.
                Fox, Assistant Professor of History, one on foreign policy, led
                by Henry A. Turner, Professor and Chairman of History, and a
                third, in English, concentrating on the feminine experience as
                revealed in various forms of literature, led by Cynthia E.
                Russett, Lecturer in English. In The Afro-American Culture of
                the Twentieth Century, led by Charles T. Davis, Professor of
                English and Chairman of Afro-American Studies, seminar members
                studied comparatively Black and white literary traditions and
                historical accounts of the experiences of Blacks and Italians in
                New Haven; examined origins of the Black migration from the
                South and of the Black ghetto in the northern city; and
                investigated qualities in Afro-American achievement that were
                distinctly black--always, however, with a concern for a debt to
                the host American culture.
              </p>
              <p>
                Nicolas M. Shumway, Assistant Professor of Spanish, led two
                interdisciplinary seminars, intended primarily for teachers of
                Spanish, bilingual education, and social studies, on Hispanic
                society and culture in Latin America and the United States.
                Drawing on both literature and history, Professor Shumway's
                first seminar, Society and Literature in Latin America, examined
                subjects ranging from the Latin American colonial experience and
                cultural dependency theories, to the culture of poverty and the
                image of the Latin America dictator. Fellows researched such
                topics as Latin American geography and history, Puerto Rican
                folklore and music, and feminist criticism of Latin American
                poetry. Professor Shumway's second seminar, Hispanic Minorities
                in the United States, explored the origins, history, social and
                immigration patterns, and contemporary culture of Hispanic
                groups in the United States. Using texts drawn from both
                scholarly and literary sources, the seminar paid particular
                attention to the two largest Hispanic groups in the United
                States, Puerto Ricans and Chicanos. Seminar members compared the
                groups' experiences in order to gain a better perspective for
                understanding each group individually. Two seminars in
                literature took a thematic approach. Adolescence and Narrative
                Strategies for Teaching Fiction, led by Ross C. Murfin,
                Assistant Professor of English, examined ideas held by
                adolescent characters and how they react to, reflect, or oppose
                the surrounding culture. In the broadest sense, the seminar
                considered the relationship between adolescence and fiction:
                what fiction can reveal about adolescence; whether, in fact,
                novels with adolescent protagonists most often represent some
                other difficult human condition. The Stranger in Modern Fiction:
                A Portrait in Black and White, led by Michael G. Cooke,
                Professor of English, considered the the idea of human freedom
                in such contexts as family history, political and legal systems,
                financial need, social customs, nature, personal failure, and
                myth. The Oral Tradition, also led by Professor Cooke, explored
                the relationship between the oral tradition and the civilization
                in which it is developed in three literary environments:
                classical Greek poetry and drama, British poetry and German
                folktales, and Black American fiction.
              </p>
              <p>
                The Institute has offered a series of four seminars on the
                teaching of writing. In the first of three seminars entitled
                Language and Writing, discussions were based largely on the
                members' own work-in-progress. The seminar leader, James A.
                Winn, Associate Professor of English, remarked, "No synthesis or
                consensus emerged from these sessions; indeed, many of the
                differences in theory and practice between the participants may
                now be more sharply defined and more deeply felt than they were.
                But I can state confidently as the seminar leader that the marks
                and dents of all that vigorous shop-talk are visible on every
                unit." The following year, led by Thomas R. Whitaker, Professor
                and Chairman of English, the seminar was intended for teachers
                who were preparing curricula dealing with some aspect of
                grammar, reading, speaking, or writing. When Professor Winn
                offered the seminar again the following year, common readings
                included material on rhetoric and linguistics, and Fellows were
                encouraged to design a curriculum unit substantially unlike
                anything they had done before. The fourth seminar in writing,
                Writing Across the Curriculum, led by Joseph W. Gordon,
                Assistant Professor of English, involved teachers from all
                disciplines, not only English. They investigated current
                research into the composition process and teaching methods that
                grew out of that research, and they drew up model assignments
                for getting students to write more often without a proportional
                increase in the teacher's work. As Professor Gordon wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                The seminar out of which these units developed engaged in
                spirited and extended disputes that, we hope, clarified the
                differences among us. There are units here that regard writing
                as a means, and others that regard it as an end in itself. There
                are units that advocate the use of drills, and others that
                instead use poetry and art to teach syntax and vocabulary. Some
                units suggest using haiku, others suggest writing postcards and
                letters, and one even speaks of the advantages of formal
                outlining. Some concentrate exclusively on techniques for
                developing the students' self-confidence and creativity. There
                are units here for teaching writing in the history and science
                class, as well as in English and foreign language classes. And a
                few units address students for whom English is a second language
                or who are classified as Developmentally Disabled. There are, in
                short, strategies here for almost any student in the middle or
                high school. Out of all this variety, we hope, the thoughtful
                and energetic teacher may discover, or just rediscover, a reason
                and a motive for "assigning more writing."
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                For all Fellows, whether in English or in other disciplines,
                working on writing and on the teaching of writing is a central
                purpose and activity of the Institute. Almost two-thirds of all
                Fellows have stated that the process of writing an Institute
                curriculum unit improved their own writing, and over
                three-fourths have reported that the experience improved their
                ability to teach writing effectively--whatever their field. In
                order to fulfill the requirements of the program, each Fellow
                must prepare a curriculum unit that is a mininum of fifteen
                pages containing four elements: a) objectives--a clear statement
                of what the unit seeks to achieve, b) strategies--a unified,
                coherent teaching plan for those objectives, c) classroom
                activities--three or more detailed examples of actual teaching
                methods of lesson plans, and d) resources--three annotated
                lists: a bibliography for teachers, a reading list for students,
                and a list of materials for classroom use. The discussion of
                objectives and strategies must be in prose and must constitute
                at least two-thirds of the completed unit.
              </p>
              <p>
                What Fellows write, then, is not "curriculum" in the usual
                sense. They are not developing content and skill objectives for
                each course and grade level, nor are they preparing day-by-day
                lesson plans for their courses. Institute units also differ from
                traditional curricula in form; they are not composed mainly of
                lists and outlines of topics to be covered. Instead, teachers
                research and write in prose about some aspect of the seminar
                subject that they will use in their own teaching.
              </p>
              <p>
                Fellows develop their curriculum units in six stages, each a
                month apart. Initially, in applying to the Institute, teachers
                describe the topic they wish to develop and its relation to
                school courses. At the second meeting of the seminar, each
                Fellow, having consulted with the seminar leader and other
                seminar members, presents a refined statement of his or her
                topic and a list of basic readings for research. Fellows then
                write, based on preliminary research, a two-to-four page
                prospectus that describes what each Fellow intends the final
                unit to contain and that provides all seminar members with an
                overview of their colleagues' work. The first draft, the next
                stage, contains the prose statement of each unit's objectives
                and strategies and is distributed and discussed in the seminars.
                A second draft includes rewriting of the objectives and
                strategies of the unit and a first writing of the unit's other
                elements. The completed unit is then due about three weeks after
                the seminar's final meeting. At each stage, Fellows receive
                written comments from the seminar leader as well as response
                from other teachers in the seminar, a part of the audience for
                whom Fellows are writing.
              </p>
              <p>
                The Institute, in short, regards the preparation of curriculum
                units as a process, and this is widely understood and accepted
                by the Fellows. One participant wrote, "the process provided a
                comfortable format, a logical progression of reading, thinking,
                and writing." A veteran Fellow wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                "After five years' experience, I find the process for unit
                writing a very balanced, flowing process. The more experienced a
                unit writer I become, the more convinced I am of the necessity
                and wisdom of the stages of the writing process. The prospectus
                gives the Fellow the momentum to move from the reading to the
                writing stage, although it does not necessarily curtail the
                continued research; the first and second drafts give the author
                an opportunity to refine his presentation."
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                From a faculty member's point of view, Professor Brodhead wrote:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                "The system of repeated drafts for the curriculum units was
                especially important in my seminar: I was very rigorous in my
                evaluation of the early drafts, and I was insistent that Fellows
                work at strengthening and clarifying what was weak and vague in
                those drafts; and I'd have to say that they without exception
                faced the challenges I set them, and moved, draft by draft,
                toward a much more significant, and much more fully-articulated,
                proposal. Touchingly, many of them said that it had been years
                since any one took their work seriously enough to criticize it;
                in any case, the way they use the seminar leader's comments as a
                means to a fuller grasp of their own thinking was enormously
                impressive to me."
              </blockquote>
              <hr />
              <p>
                Having characterized the operation of the Institute in English
                and foreign languages and some of the administrative detail that
                we in New Haven have found advantageous, I think it is important
                now to stress the principles on which the program is founded,
                because the principles, and not the exact form, are what we set
                forth for others to consider adopting, and adapting to their own
                setting. What we offer is not a blueprint to be followed in
                detail in building a similar program elsewhere; rather, we
                advance the underlying philosophy and resulting variety of our
                own experience.
              </p>
              <p>
                Four principles, all implanted in the first Institute in l978,
                and each shaped over time by experience, guide the program and
                constitute much of its distinctiveness. They are: 1) our belief
                in the fundamental importance of the classroom teacher and of
                teacher-developed materials for effective learning; 2) our
                insistence that teachers of students at different levels
                interact as colleagues, addressing the common problems of
                teaching their disciplines; 3) our conviction that any effort to
                improve teaching must be "teacher-centered" and our consequent
                dependence on the Institute Coordinators, teachers in each
                school who meet weekly with the Director and who constitute an
                essential part of the program's leadership; and 4) our certainty
                that the University can assist in improving the public schools
                only if we make a significant and long-term commitment to do so.
              </p>
              <p>
                The Institute differs from conventional modes of curricular
                development.
                <sup>
                  <a id="text_2" name="text_2"></a>
                  <a  href="#note_2">
                    2
                  </a>
                </sup>{' '}
                Classroom teachers, who best know their students' needs, work
                with Yale faculty members, who are leading scholars in their
                fields. The Institute does not develop curricula on certain
                topics only because they are important in terms of recent
                scholarship; rather, it brings this knowledge to the assistance
                of teachers in areas they identify as their main concerns. The
                Institute involves no "curriculum experts" in the usual sense,
                who would themselves develop new materials, train teachers in
                short-term workshops to use these materials, and then expect the
                materials significantly to improve classroom teaching. Instead,
                the Institute seeks to demonstrate that intensive and long-term
                collaboration between a university and its neighboring school
                system--between school teachers and university scholars--can
                produce curriculum materials of high quality pertinent to
                student needs, and can have a major influence on teaching and
                learning in the schools.
              </p>
              <p>
                By writing a curriculum unit, teachers think formally about the
                ways in which what they are learning can be applied in their own
                teaching; we emphasize that the Institute experience must have
                direct bearing on their own classes. In the end, their units
                reflect both the direction provided by the Yale faculty members
                and the experience gained by each teacher in the classroom, his
                or her sense of what will work for students.
              </p>
              <p>
                This balance between academic preparation and practical,
                classroom application--as well as the depth and duration of our
                local collaborative relationship--are the central features of
                the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. Our outside evaluator in
                l980, Professor Robert Kellogg, Dean of the College at the
                University of Virginia, points out:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                That Yale does not have a school or a department of Education is
                in this instance a blessing. Without an intermediary buffer,
                softening, exaggerating, or explaining away the contrast of
                intellectual milieu between secondary education and higher
                education, the two groups of teachers (the Institute Fellows and
                the Yale faculty) are free to explore for themselves the extent
                to which they share values and assumptions about their subject
                and its role in the development of children's minds and
                characters.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                The Institute is the only interschool and interdisciplinary
                forum enabling school teachers to work with each other and with
                Yale faculty. In referring to the collegial spirit of the
                program, we are speaking of a dynamic process that brings
                together individuals who teach very different students at
                different levels of their subjects, and who bring to the program
                a variety of perspectives and strongly held points of view. The
                tensions and disagreements that arise from these different
                perspectives are a source of vitality and innovation. Each
                challenges the preconceptions of the other with the result that
                University faculty understand something more about teaching at
                the secondary level while school teachers often reconsider their
                expectations of their students' ability to learn. With our
                emphasis on the authority of the secondary school teacher, the
                bond between Fellows and Yale faculty is one of mutual respect
                and a shared commitment to the best education for New Haven
                students.
              </p>
              <p>
                The Institute is organized to foster this sense of collegiality.
                Fellows are not students paying tuition for regular,
                graduate-level courses. Instead, teachers are remunerated, each
                Fellow receiving an honorarium on successful completion of the
                program. As full members of the Yale community, Fellows are
                listed in the University Directory of faculty and staff; this
                has symbolic meaning in recognizing them as colleagues and
                practical value in making Yale resources readily accessible to
                them. Through the Institute, teachers gain access to human and
                physical resources throughout the University, not only to those
                specifically organized by the Institute.
              </p>
              <p>
                Also, the seminars are conducted in an informal, flexible
                style--a tradition established by the first group of Yale
                faculty who taught in the program, and maintained by some
                continuity of faculty and faculty meetings with the Coordinators
                and Director. This makes the Institute utterly unlike the
                graduate-level courses in Education most of the Fellows have
                taken, and often unlike the graduate seminars most of the Yale
                faculty ordinarily teach.
              </p>
              <p>
                In order to practice collegiality in the day-to-day workings of
                the Institute, we devised an administrative structure that would
                reflect the primacy of teachers. We did not wish the program to
                be something concocted by Yale and imposed upon the Fellows, nor
                did we wish to create different classes of Fellows by involving
                New Haven school administrators in administrative roles in the
                Institute. At the most practical level, we hoped to use peers to
                solve problems of absence or lateness, in order to avoid placing
                the Yale faculty in authoritarian roles. The Coordinators have
                provided a solution to all these potential difficulties. Again,
                Professor Kellogg's report puts the matter well:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                In order that the "managerial" aspect of the school
                administration not be reflected in the operation of the
                Institute, a small group of teachers, the Institute
                Coordinators, serves to "represent" both the schools in the
                Institute and the Institute in the schools. The conception is
                ingenious, and the individuals who serve as Coordinators are,
                more than any other single element, crucial to the Institute's
                successful operation. The Coordinators I met were thoughtful and
                intelligent men and women who understood the purpose of the
                Institute and were effective representatives of the two
                institutions of which they were members.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Through the Coordinators, who collectively represent every
                middle and high school teacher in the humanities and in the
                sciences, teachers are directly involved in the cyclical
                planning, conduct, evaluation, and refinement of the program.
                Through them we have developed and maintained both rigorous
                expectations and an accommodating schedule so that there has
                been a high level of participation by New Haven teachers.
                Between l978 and l983 forty percent of New Haven secondary
                school teachers in the humanities and the sciences successfully
                completed at least one year of the Institute. The evaluation of
                the Coordinators by participating Fellows confirms their crucial
                role; one Fellow wrote, "as long as there are teacher
                Coordinators, the program will belong to all the participants."
                This proprietary feeling of teachers toward the Institute, the
                feeling that it is "teacher-centered," is essential to our
                success.
              </p>
              <p>
                To participate in so demanding a program, teachers must believe
                that the Institute can assist them in their own teaching and
                that, by extension, it can eventually improve teaching and
                learning throughout the schools. Our evaluator in l98l, Ernest
                L. Boyer, wrote in his report:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                The project has teacher-coordinators in each participating
                school who clearly are committed and who pass on their
                enthusiasm to colleagues. One of the most impressive features of
                my visit was the after school session I had with these
                Coordinators from the New Haven schools. Arriving after a
                fatiguing day, the teachers turned, with enthusiasm, to key
                issues. How can the Institute best help us meet our goals? How
                can we improve our work? ...The dedication and optimism of these
                teachers was impressive, almost touching....The significance of
                teacher leadership cannot be overstated.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                Using common sense, we know that the impact of the Institute
                will be roughly proportional to the number of teachers who
                participate on a recurring basis. The impact of the Institute on
                teachers' preparation and curricula is cumulative; we must
                annually involve a large enough proportion of New Haven teachers
                to be credible in claiming that their participation can improve
                the public schools. Each curriculum unit a teacher writes
                represents only a fraction of all he or she teaches, and the
                very nature of the academic disciplines and their teaching is
                not static, but constantly changing. Should the Institute ever
                become so limited in scope or duration as to appear trivial, it
                would cease to attract a sizable percentage of New Haven
                teachers and would become ineffectual. In one of its principal
                recommendations the Commission on the Humanities concluded:
              </p>
              <blockquote>
                Because schools change slowly, we endorse models of
                school-college collaboration that emphasize long-term
                cooperation. We recommend that more colleges or universities and
                school districts adopt such programs for their mutual benefit,
                and that funding sources sustain programs and administrative
                costs on a continuing basis. Programs of school-college
                collaboration offer the best opportunity to strengthen
                instruction in the schools while providing intellectual renewal
                for teachers.
              </blockquote>
              <p>
                As our evaluator last year, Theodore R. Sizer noted, "Such
                renewal does not come quickly. It benefits from sustained
                contact, from supportive conditions, from simmering." It is
                therefore most encouraging that, after five years of developing
                the Teachers Institute as a model of university-school
                collaboration, Yale decided to seek a $4 million endowment to
                give the program a secure future.
              </p>
              <p>
                Yale and New Haven together have supported a major share of the
                total cost of the Teachers Institute. A considerable portion of
                our remaining need has been met through strong and continuing
                support from the National Endowment for the Humanities. We have
                been pleased also to receive support in the form of operating
                funds from numerous foundations and corporations--including more
                than fifty local businesses which see our efforts to improve the
                education of all young people in the area as a good form of
                community development. The present endowment campaign
                underscores our deep belief in the long-term significance of the
                Teachers Institute to the University and to our community's
                public schools. It also represents our determination to
                demonstrate that effective collaborative programs can be not
                only developed, but also sustained.
              </p>
              <hr />
              <p>
                There is, in my view, no more important recommendation in the
                Carnegie Foundation Special Report on School and College than
                the one--contained also in the Carnegie Report on High
                School--that calls for universities and schools to develop
                genuine partnerships based on the needs of schools as determined
                by their principals and teachers. Both aspects of that
                recommendation are essential: not only that universities and
                schools work together, but especially that those of us in higher
                education encourage our colleagues in schools to show us the
                ways we can marshall our resources to address their needs.
              </p>
              <p>
                Drawing on our experience with developing our own program and
                with assisting other institutions that wish to establish similar
                programs, I would offer the following guidelines for the
                successful implementation of the Carnegie recommendation.
              </p>
              <ul>
                <li>
                  First, "collaboration" is a term currently used to describe
                  quite varied activities. I mean by the term something
                  specific. Collaboration arises from a recognition of mutual
                  interest between school and college--between city and
                  college--that must become more widespread if we are to improve
                  our public schools. To be authentic, a partnership should be a
                  coequal relationship of colleagues, a volunteer association of
                  individuals who choose to work together, of allies in league
                  to improve our schools. An equal importance must be attached
                  to what each partner brings to the relationship. The aim is to
                  work together without everybody changing place.
                </li>
                <li>
                  Because institutional and other resources are never adequate,
                  an early step in establishing a collaborative program is to
                  assess the resources that can be made available to meet the
                  needs of schools, and then to apply these resources in an
                  intensive way where the need is greatest. Institutional
                  support must come from both sides of the partnership; tangible
                  and visible evidence of such commitment is essential.
                </li>
                <li>
                  We especially need to encourage partnerships between schools
                  and universities that concentrate on teaching and on the
                  continuing engagement of teachers with their fields.
                  Cooperative efforts should insist on a direct application in
                  school classrooms.
                </li>
                <li>
                  A tendency in establishing collaborative programs--indeed, in
                  school reform efforts generally--is to be too ambitious.
                  Programs will succeed only if they have well-defined and
                  manageable goals; they should avoid making impossible claims.
                </li>
                <li>
                  Precisely because collaborative projects can achieve only
                  limited, though important, results, participants must be
                  confident that their efforts are worthwhile. An ongoing
                  evaluation process is therefore integral to a program's design
                  and should be used perennially to refine both goals and
                  activities. Because collaborative programs are often,
                  unfortunately, seen as non-traditional--because they may not
                  be regarded as central to the mission of either partner--they
                  have a special burden for providing good evidence of their
                  results.
                </li>
                <li>
                  The most successful projects may well begin small, investing
                  real authority in teacher leadership and developing
                  organically based on the needs teachers identify. In that way,
                  programs are not guided by preconceptions, but grow from their
                  own local experience. Efforts at school improvement will not
                  succeed without teacher leadership. In this country we have
                  too long held teachers responsible for the condition of our
                  schools without giving them responsibility--empowering
                  them--to improve our schools.
                </li>
                <li>
                  For these reasons, and I cannot over-emphasize this point, for
                  the benefits to be lasting, collaborative programs must be
                  long-term.
                </li>
              </ul>
              <p>
                Not all teachers are sanguine about the prospects for public
                secondary education. But the vision of our Institute, which many
                share, is that the problems confronting us are not intractable,
                and that working through the Institute teachers can improve the
                education and the lives of their students. By assigning greater
                prestige and power to school teaching and by engaging teachers
                in study and writing about their disciplines, the Teachers
                Institute implicitly questions whether teaching in school and
                teaching in college should be regarded as so very different. The
                educational levels and institutions in this country are not
                discrete and separable compartments, but parts of a whole
                educational process, for teacher and student alike. Continuing
                study and writing about a subject benefit school teachers no
                less than their university colleagues. In both cases, their
                students are the ultimate beneficiaries.
              </p>
              <hr />
              <h3>Notes</h3>
              <p>
                Portions of this essay are based on material in{' '}
                <i>
                  <a  href="../pubs/A4">
                    Teaching in America: The Common Ground
                  </a>
                </i>
                , rev. ed., New York: College Board, 1984. Copyright &copy; 1983
                and 1984 by James R. Vivian.
              </p>
              <a id="note_1" name="note_1"></a>
              <a  href="#text_1">
                1
              </a>
              <p>For a discussion of state and regional differences, see C. Emily
              Feistritzer, The Condition of Teaching, A State by State Analysis
              (Princeton, New Jersey: The Carnegie Foundation for the
              Advancement of Teaching, l983). For further information on
              national trends, see especially Status of the American Public
              School Teacher l980-8l (National Education Association Research,
              l982); and the following publications of the National Center for
              Education Statistics: Projections of Education Statistics to
              l990-9l; The Condition of Education, l983 Edition; The Condition
              of Education, l984.
              </p>
              <a id="note_2" name="note_2"></a>
              <a  href="#text_2">
                2
              </a>
              <p>See especially Seymour B. Sarason,
              <i>The Culture of the School and the Problem of Change</i>
              (Boston: l97l), chapter 4, who discusses the contrary manner in
              which "new math" was developed and introduced in the classroom.
              </p>
              <p>
                <a
                  aria-pressed="true"
                  class="btn px-4 btn-primary backtotop btn-sm ml-2"
                  
                  href="#"
                  id="backtotop"
                  role="button"
                >
                  Back to Top <i class="fas fa fa-arrow-up"></i>
                </a>
              </p>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
    </main