---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1991/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1991/1/91.01.01.x.html">91.01.01</a> <br/> This unit gives multiple perspectives of the regional history of Spain and Latin America. Students will share on-going activities using a time line and compilation of words exchanged from one language and culture to another. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/1/91.01.03.x.html">91.01.03</a> <br/> Through an audiotape exchange of oral histories recorded by a class in North Carolina and one in New Haven, this unit attempts to demonstrate the effect of regionalism on prejudice. A variety of pupil-involving activities are used to arrive at this point. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/1/91.01.04.x.html">91.01.04</a> <br/> Using slides and a walking tour, this unit examines the richness of Victorian Architecture in New Haven as a way of understanding the cultures and life styles of that period. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/1/91.01.07.x.html">91.01.07</a> <br/> Using African American Literature, this unit examines the regional differences existing in the people and the literature of the North and South. Its focus begins with the Civil War, follows the Great Migration, and culminates with the Harlem Renaissance of the 1920's. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.02.x.html">91.02.02</a> <br/> This unit examines Cajun Music within the context of its culture. Additionally, it hopes to motivate students to learn French. Appropriate background information is included. Object analysis is used in some lessons. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.03.x.html">91.02.03</a> <br/> Through integrating art appreciation into the art curriculum, this unit focuses on African American artists and the cultural viewpoint they project. Contains appropriate information and a number of interesting, hands-on art activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.04.x.html">91.02.04</a> <br/> Focusing on the family customs among the Ashanti tribe of Ghana, this unit uses a number of techniques, including object analysis. Contains considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.05.x.html">91.02.05</a> <br/> Focusing on architecture in American history, this unit promotes an understanding of how environment, culture, and natural resources effect the construction of dwellings. Some attention is given to Native American homes. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.06.x.html">91.02.06</a> <br/> This unit attempts to provide students with an understanding of the cultural richness and diversity of Puerto Rican people. Contains a number of suggestions for activities which will actively involve students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.07.x.html">91.02.07</a> <br/> This unit examines the culture of the Inuit family. It contains a number of art lessons which should easily engage pupils. Uses object analysis. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/2/91.02.08.x.html">91.02.08</a> <br/> This unit attempts to give children a picture of New Haven’s cultural heritage. Using object analysis, it proposes a number of interesting activities and related field trips. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.01.x.html">91.03.01</a> <br/> Through studying the life and works of Langston Hughes, this unit presents a picture of growing up in America as an African American. Contains considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.02.x.html">91.03.02</a> <br/> Through a focus on Prince Hall, an organizer of Black Freemasons, this unit gives us information on African American history. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.03.x.html">91.03.03</a> <br/> Concentrating on scenes and themes which occur during childhood and adolescence, this unit uses autobiographical material written by African American to help young students deal with their search for identity. Activities stress writing. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.04.x.html">91.03.04</a> <br/> This unit examines the life of John Johnson and other African American entrepreneurs in an attempt to present positive role models to young students. Contains short sketches and photographs about some black businessmen. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.05.x.html">91.03.05</a> <br/> Through the use of autobiography, this unit focuses on the educational views of Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, and W.E.B. DuBois in order to give students a variety of role models with varying theories of education. Contains appropriate background information on each. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.06.x.html">91.03.06</a> <br/> Through the use of autobiography, this unit attempts to show students the progress African Americans have made throughout their history. Beginning with slave narratives and continuing to modern times, detailed objectives, facts to be covered, discussion topics, paragraph themes, and author's style are included. Also suggests role play. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.07.x.html">91.03.07</a> <br/> This unit teaches African American autobiography by examining the work of Langston Hughes, primarily his autobiography, <i>The</i> <i>Big</i> Sea. His poems are integrated throughout. Student writing is stressed. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.08.x.html">91.03.08</a> <br/> Using slave narratives, both fictional and fictionalized, this unit presents students with oral and written testimony about slavery from slaves and former slaves. Contains significant background information and lesson suggestions. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.09.x.html">91.03.09</a> <br/> After a basic understanding of African American history has been established, this unit examines two African American families, one largely fictionalized, <i>Role</i> <i>of</i> <i>Thunder</i> <i>Hear</i> <i>My</i> <i>Cry,</i> and one factual, <i>Maggie</i>'<i>s</i> <i>American</i> Dream. Includes role-play and lesson involving high school drop-outs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/3/91.03.10.x.html">91.03.10</a> <br/> The unit focuses on the lives of Maya Angelou and James Comer to help students understand the accomplishments each achieved despite the obstacles each was forced to overcome. Stresses reading and writing skills. Appropriate background information and lesson suggestions included. Relates to unit <a href="../../../guides/1985/5/85.05.04.x.html">85.05.04</a> </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.01.x.html">91.04.01</a> <br/> Using the work of Native American writers, this unit attempts to study this culture and how the individual establishes personal and collective identity. Contains considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.02.x.html">91.04.02</a> <br/> This unit exposes students to poetry written by Hispanic writers. It aims to inspire writing in both English and Spanish. Also included are the works of second generation Puerto Ricans. Steps for covering unit are laid out clearly. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.03.x.html">91.04.03</a> <br/> Designed for high school special education students, but usable in other areas, this unit uses African American poetry to develop academic skills, as well as awareness and pride. Contains background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.04.x.html">91.04.04</a> <br/> This unit attempts to teach children about African American poets beginning with Lucy Terry, a slave girl, to the more modern poets. Encourages reading and writing of poetry. Gives short biographical sketches on a number of poets. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.05.x.html">91.04.05</a> <br/> Using poetry from America, Africa, the Caribbean, and Spain, this unit creates a guide for teaching children to write poetry. Lessons also develop pride and appreciation. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.07.x.html">91.04.07</a> <br/> In teaching the class about poetry in general, part of this unit focuses on several contemporary African American, Native American, and Hispanic poets. Unit is clearly developed. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1991/4/91.04.08.x.html">91.04.08</a> <br/> The author, a ventriloquist, uses puppetry to introduce poetry to young children. Activities and content are designed to increase self-worth. Stresses oral presentations and student involvement. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>