---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 86.04.14"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1986/4/86.04.14.x.html"
unitTitle: "Practical Writing"
unitAuthor: "Barbara W. Coles Trader"
keywords: "Basic Skills Writing Instruction Reading Instruction Motivational"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Intermediate level Reading and Language Arts classes, grades 6 and 7"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 86.04.14:
</h4>
The unit will provide writing instruction for a variety of narrative and expository forms. The students will write for many purposes. The purposes will be to inform others about themselves, people, places, things; to explain; and to persuade.
<p>
There will be three stages to improve writing fluency. Journal Writing: It will help students gain confidence, be more positive and have successful writing experiences. Meanwhile, the journals will not be revised or rewritten and will be shared with others/an audience only if the author desires to do 80. Group Writing: The phases of the writing process will be introduced to the students. The students will learn by doing; they will create their individual non-fictional and fictional works. To effectively communicate their ideas and thoughts, the students will use basic questions as a guide: What am I writing? Who is going to read my article? Why do I want my article read? Individual Writing: The students will be composing individually. They will use the writing process to develop compositions that reflect their ideas and style. There will be varied motivational themes to show students that writers write in a variety of forms (letters, essays, and stories). Meanwhile, the students will write for different audiences and purposes.
</p>
<p>
The process of writing, the connection to reading and speaking will be addressed. Phonology, vocabulary, lexicons and thinking skills will be briefly introduced.
</p>
<p>
In conclusion, the management of sequential writing instruction will involve prewriting strategies; planning and organizing; first draft; revising; conferences and proofreading; editing; final draft; and language enrichment.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Intermediate level Reading and Language Arts classes, grades 6 and 7)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Basic Skills Writing Instruction Reading Instruction Motivational
</i>
</p>
</body>