---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 86.04.11"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1986/4/86.04.11.x.html"
unitTitle: "Thoughts to Page: Explorations and Expressions"
unitAuthor: "Mary Ellen Mcdevitt"
keywords: "Basic Skills Writing Instruction"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for English classes, grades 5-8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 86.04.11:
</h4>
While many middle and high school students have difficulty mastering the stages of writing, there is a kind of student in our schools for whom expression and writing have become one more negative experience in the educational system—that is, they cannot write and the classroom serves as a daily reminder of this failure. These are my students.
<p>
When these students come to my Resource Room, the central task I face is to rebuild their confidence that what they have to say is valuable and that they can master some basic writing skills. There exist a number of different approaches to opening up the student with limited skills. The lessons in this unit are based on the techniques of modeling and clustering. I believe that modeling leads the students to achieve, step-by-step, certain beginning skills in writing and expression without placing undue expectations on them (and thus creating a sense of failure once again). Clustering helps them to move from speech to writing with ease, and reinforces beginning thinking skills.
</p>
<p>
This unit describes the kind of student who has problems in language and expressions; describes the modeling and clustering approaches to learning; gives a brief overview of how this unit fits into this school semester; and gives detailed, daily lesson plans for 8 weeks based on the above approaches.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for English classes, grades 5-8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Basic Skills Writing Instruction
</i>
</p>
</body>