---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 00.06.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2000/6/00.06.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Gardens in an Urban Environment"
unitAuthor: "Luis Recalde"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science and Social Studies, grades 2-6."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 00.06.03:
</h4>
Photosynthesis is at the center of the building and continuation of life in the planet. The process of photosynthesis is essential for the growth of most plants on land and in the oceans of the world. The growth of plants is key to the maintenance of life on the planet. Humans depend on plants and animals for survival. Photosynthesis is directly connected to the growth of gardens. This curriculum unit is designed for students of the fifth grade elementary level in an urban or suburban environment. This could also apply for any other environment where plants could grow. One of the objectives of this unit is to have students describe and explain the process of photosynthesis. Student will also be able to connect photosynthesis to other fields of science and the disciplines in the curricula of the fifth grade. Students will also plan, design, set up, maintain and evaluate several types of urban gardens in the school environment. Writing, reading, mathematics and social studies are directly connected to the exploration of photosynthesis in this unit. A garden is an effective motivator for students to learn how to love science and how to present their findings in writing and in oral presentations. A science fair project is an excellent vehicle to test our premises and objectives.
<p>
(Recommended for Science and Social Studies, grades 2-6.)
</p>
</body>