---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 87.03.05"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1987/3/87.03.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "How Do Artists Get Their Ideas? Culture and Environment as Sources of Ideas"
unitAuthor: "Diane Pressler"
keywords: "Art American African and Native Drawing Art Instruction Composition and Inspiration"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for General Art classes, grades 5-8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 87.03.05:
</h4>
This unit is designed to: 1) increase students’ ability to generate their own ideas for art images; 2) help students realize the effect environment and cultural background have on the way artists and they themselves view life; 3) introduce students to ways of looking at and finding meaning in art work; and 4) help students develop their verbal, written, and art skills.
<p>
This unit exposes students to the lives and creative works of American artists with cultural backgrounds both similar to and different from their own. It is divided into three sub-units that can be taught separately or in sequence. It includes a Black artist, Jacob Lawrence; a White artist, Andrew Wyeth; and Native American art of the Plains Indians. The sub-units were designed to be used in art classes by middle school students in grades five through eight. Each sub-unit contains a brief biographical/historical account on each artist/group, lesson plans, teaching strategies, and a detailed step-by-step description of art instruction for a particular lesson.
</p>
<p>
Four art concepts are explored in the lessons: “Composition”—the arrangement of objects on a page (stressing the relationship between parts to parts, and parts to the whole); “Space”—the relationship between figure/ground; “Balance”—symmetrical and asymmetrical balance; and “Meaning/Expression” in artwork—learning to look at and for the expressive qualities inherent in artwork (famous work and their own efforts).
</p>
<p>
I have worked with students using the approaches I have mentioned with a lot of success; however, the teacher is warned that in the Andrew Wyeth unit “drawing what you see” is very difficult for students, so a lot of encouragement has to be given.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for General Art classes, grades 5-8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Art American African and Native Drawing Art Instruction Composition and Inspiration
</i>
</p>
</body>