---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1980/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1980/1/80.01.01.x.html">80.01.01</a> <br/> Through the use of geography, biography, and economic studies, this unit exposes students to the literary work of <i>Don Quixote </i>. Activities included show the relationship between the Spanish and English languages. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/1/80.01.02.x.html">80.01.02</a> <br/> Through exposure to many Latin American novels, the students will explore educational beliefs, historical events, musical instruments, and foods associated with South America. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/1/80.01.05.x.html">80.01.05</a> <br/> By reading selected writings of white and black women writers, this unit is designed to investigate the strengths, knowledge, and struggles of American women as writers. Authors highlighted are Maya Angelou, Toni Morrison, Katie Chopin, and Mary Wilkins. Students will compare the literary elements of each selection regarding writing styles, experiences, creative expression, and societal coping strategies of women. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/1/80.01.07.x.html">80.01.07</a> <br/> A combination of poetry and short stories will be used to acquaint teachers and students with France's geography, history, and vocabulary. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/2/80.02.02.x.html">80.02.02</a> <br/> Designed for art classes but easily integrated into other content areas, this unit describes the artistic contributions of North American Indians. It engages students in activities that teach an appreciation of environmental materials, their uses in creating art, and encourages them to create art that represents their own environment and beliefs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/3/80.03.04.x.html">80.03.04</a> <br/> In this unit plays, poetry, role playing, and improvisation are techniques used to critique the historical roles of black women. Unit consists of exercises that actively engage students in research projects and problem solving situations. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/5/80.05.07.x.html">80.05.07</a> <br/> An interdisciplinary approach to teaching the human population of New Haven as well as other countries of the world, this unit involves population graphs, surveys, family planning programs, various aspects of population and comparative reports. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.01.x.html">80.06.01</a> <br/> The use of this unit will equip the students with tools to identify prejudice between Jews and Christians in Europe during W.W. II. Historical content describes concentration camps, resistance/non-resistance and survival techniques used by Jewish people. Detailed geography lessons, extensive terminology, films, and photographs are used to examine problems associated with the Holocaust. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.02.x.html">80.06.02</a> <br/> This unit suggests a new approach to teaching African American history. <br/> It attempts to provide a model from which historical, sociological, and economic information can be organized and analyzed. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.04.x.html">80.06.04</a> <br/> An evaluation of African American culture through music, this unit examines a time line of events that shaped "black" music enjoyed by many ethnic groups. Strong emphasis on jazz, gospel, and rhythm and blues in the sixties. </p><p> <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.06.x.html">80.06.06</a> <br/> This unit investigates the attitudes of Americans as they attempt to achieve the American Dream. Literature, television and interviews are used to examine attitudes of working class Americans. Addresses many ethnic groups. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.07.x.html">80.06.07</a> <br/> This unit outlines historical events that shaped America's multicultural working class. A wealth of classroom activities including the use of art, literature, films, and field trips that will enable students to understand the working world around them. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.08.x.html">80.06.08</a> <br/> Rich in Spanish terminology, this unit examines the culture, history, and government of Puerto Rico. Strong emphasis is placed on writing for courses that rely on history and current events. Many films covering many aspects of Puerto Rican culture are suggested. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.09.x.html">80.06.09</a> <br/> Through reading and social studies lessons, this unit integrates Connecticut and African American history. Students assemble personal booklets that reflect six major topics related to slavery in Connecticut: colonial period, Black code, social conditions, gradual emancipation, Revolutionary War, and final abolition of slavery in 1848. Includes biographical sketches of African Americans of these periods. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1980/6/80.06.10.x.html">80.06.10</a> <br/> Compiles multi-ethnic contributions to the development of New Haven. Provides activities that concentrate on ethnic festivals, celebrations, and holidays. Musical instruments, foods, language, and arts and crafts are used to diversify student appreciation of holidays and occasions. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>