---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 09.01.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2009/1/09.01.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Love: The Art of Seeing, Knowing and Writing Today and in the Past"
unitAuthor: "Marialuisa Sapienza"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for English, AP English Language and Composition, and AP English Literature and Composition, grades 11 and 12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 09.01.07:
</h4>
Love is a feeling or an emotion, but it can also be positive attitudes and behaviors. Our retina will never construct the image of love because it is not a physical object. However, being in love leads to behavioral changes we can see and describe. The unit starts with the following essential questions: "What do I see? What do I notice? Is this love?" It includes a visual section that primarily teaches students to see details, interpret them, infer, analyze the context, and discuss what an artist/author wants to communicate with a visual image. A second section focuses on critical thinking and takes into consideration the following essays: "Seeing" by Annie Dillard, "I Want a Wife" by Judy Brady, "The Breakups That Got Under My Skin" by Kerry Cohen published in
<i>
The New York Times
</i>
, and the novel
<i>
Great Expectations
</i>
by Charles Dickens. The objective is to enhance students' ability to see details, pay close attention to context, think, close-read, analyze, discuss, synthesize, and evaluate themes. The unit requires various writing activities and concludes with a documented essay or, for those students who have special needs, a simple documented visual presentation.
<p>
(Recommended for English, AP English Language and Composition, and AP English Literature and Composition, grades 11 and 12)
</p>
</body>