---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1987/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.01.x.html">87.01.01</a> <br/> Through reading and discussing the novel, <i>The</i> <i>Highroad</i> <i>of</i> <i>St.</i> James, this unit develops an understanding of Caribbean culture and its relationship to the slave trade. May be read in Spanish. Contains considerable background information. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.02.x.html">87.01.02</a> <br/> This unit contains a number of interesting, hands-on art activities, based on Latin American art. Sufficient background information and photographs are also included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.03.x.html">87.01.03</a> <br/> Aimed primarily at advanced Spanish classes and native speakers, this unit covers three short stories. Contains background information on authors and some detailed lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.04.x.html">87.01.04</a> <br/> The unit uses an interdisciplinary approach to teaching about Puerto Rico, but its focus is on literature. Contains adequate information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.05.x.html">87.01.05</a> <br/> This unit examines the history of slavery, slave trade, and slave revolts with particular emphasis on happenings in the Caribbean. A brief section examines the impact of this period upon literature. Contains a number of maps and graphs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.06.x.html">87.01.06</a> <br/> Aimed at learning disabled students of Spanish, this unit examines Latin American culture through the short story. A number of worksheets are included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.07.x.html">87.01.07</a> <br/> This unit is designed to be taught primarily in Spanish. It introduces the history and literature of Mexico. Most of the unit itself is written in Spanish. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.08.x.html">87.01.08</a> <br/> Placed in a literary, historical, and cultural context, the short story of Latin America is examined. Activities attempt to develop an understanding of the place of Latin American traditions in modern literature. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.09.x.html">87.01.09</a> <br/> Designed for a Spanish class, this unit examines work from contemporary Puerto Rican story tellers grounded in their culture and traditions. Lesson plans are in detail. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/2/87.02.06.x.html">87.02.06</a> <br/> As students study the attempts of early settlers to establish communities, they develop their own community which then is compared and contrasted with the examples from history. Much of what they discover can be related to cultural groups existing today. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/2/87.02.12.x.html">87.02.12</a> <br/> Through the use of literature, this unit attempts to examine the important values of various groups, Puerto Rican and African American, and encourages pupils to develop values of their own. Suggests possibilities for dramatization. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.01.x.html">87.03.01</a> <br/> Through examining contemporary African American poets, this unit attempts to familiarize students with the attitudes and values of the times in which they were written. Contains significant background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.02.x.html">87.03.02</a> <br/> Focusing on the lives and beliefs of Thoreau, Gandhi, and King, this unit exposes students to non-violent protest. Contains background information and detailed lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.03.x.html">87.03.03</a> <br/> Using literature to examine the struggles faced by African Americans, this unit also tries to help students, especially black students, develop greater self-esteem. Activities involve discussion, writing, and self-examination. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.04.x.html">87.03.04</a> <br/> Using African American poetry, this unit attempts to help students understand themselves and others. Contains background information and interesting suggestions for use with a variety of poems pupils should relate to easily. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.05.x.html">87.03.05</a> <br/> Through examining the lives and creations of Jacob Lawrence and Andrew Wyeth, along with a look at Native American art, this unit contains many intriguing lesson suggestions for related art activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.06.x.html">87.03.06</a> <br/> This unit examines American humor in a historical and cultural context with some emphasis on African American humor. Also focuses on work of Mark Twain. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1987/3/87.03.07.x.html">87.03.07</a> <br/> Using African art, this unit explores the roots of African American culture. Contains considerable background information. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>