---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 90.01.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1990/1/90.01.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "Immigration to South America: Argentina"
unitAuthor: "Wanda A. Velez"
keywords: "History South American Immigration"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies, grade 8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 90.01.06:
</h4>
In this unit I have attempted to look at the concept of immigration in general, and then have focused on immigration to Argentina in particular.
<p>
Much has been written about the “melting pot” theory of the United States, and many debates have arisen around this theory. Are we really a “melting pot”? In a previously written unit (88.02.06) I have explored this theory. In this present unit I am looking at immigration in South America, concentrating on Argentina. In order to understand the impact of the large scale immigration to Argentina, I also looked briefly at the history of the country, from early Spanish Colony to the modern day nation.
</p>
<p>
From all the sources that I have read, I have come to the conclusion that the assimilation and integration of the immigrants in Argentina was always a more tolerant and easy process than in the United States. Argentina, due mainly to the overwhelming majority of two similar, national groups, the Italians and the Spaniards among the immigrants, seems to have reached a true “melting pot.”
</p>
<p>
It is very important for our students to understand the sociological implications of migration, and the influence of the immigrant on the culture, history, and development of any given country.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Social Studies, grade 8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
History South American Immigration
</i>
</p>
</body>