---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 84.03.10"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1984/3/84.03.10.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Bilingual Student: Understanding Language Imagery"
unitAuthor: "Ruth M. Wilson"
keywords: "General Spanish English Bilingualism Language Skills Foreign Instruction"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 6th and 7th grade Remedial Reading classes"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 84.03.10:
</h4>
The bilingual Student: Understanding Language Imagery is a unit prepared for remedial readers.  It is an attempt to expose students with problems to an alternate way of understanding reading material.
<p>
Bilingual students often do not understand what they are reading when they come upon Idiomatic Expressions.  Therefore, this unit seeks to reinforce the meanings of Similes, Metaphors, and Colloquialisms and how and why they are used.
</p>
<p>
Understanding “language imagery” is designed to make the bilingual student more comfortable and knowledgeable with reading and language usage.  With the use of the computer, worksheets, TV, radio, and ads, students will be able to have hands on experience and become involved in the learning process.
</p>
<p>
This unit is constructed for six and seventh grade students with lessons that can vary according to grade level.  The four main objectives in the unit are:
</p>
<p>
1) define fifty idioms 2) help students to understand idioms in reading and in conversation 3) demonstrate the appropriateness of using idioms 4) provide activities for students to use these idioms
</p>
<p>
The Computer Programs in “general imagery” are prepared so that students can recall previous lessons learned.  Using these lessons, students are expected to follow directions and to make simple decisions.  The activities at the beginning and end of unit, on the computer, will enable each student to see the exact amount of growth by comparing pre-and post-test scores with the computerized printouts.  These lessons are on cassette tape to be used with the TRS-80 Model 111 Computer.  Instructions for use of cassette can be located at The Yale New Haven Institute, 53 Wall Street, New Haven, Conn.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for 6th and 7th grade Remedial Reading classes)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
General Spanish English Bilingualism Language Skills Foreign Instruction
</i>
</p>
</body>