---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 91.01.02"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1991/1/91.01.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Law in the North and South as It Relates to Business from the 1900s to the 1990s"
unitAuthor: "Lillie M. Jones"
keywords: "Adolescence Teenage Rights American History Regions Regionalism Business Law Contemporary Law"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Business Law and History, grades 9-12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 91.01.02:
</h4>
I have designed this unit in order that it may help individuals to understand how laws are different in parts of this country. This unit will also show that certain laws will be the same.
<p>
I would recommend that this unit be taught at the high school level in a Business Law class or a United States History class. However, there are certain parts of the unit that may be used at a lower grade level (grades 7 and 8). The portion of the unit that I think could be used at the lower grades is Law for the Minor. Teachers in those grade levels might want to use the purchase of alcohol and cigarettes to help students in a Connecticut History class understand the tobacco and alcohol laws in the state. I think this level may also benefit from the school Rules and Parental Rights portion.
</p>
<p>
At the high school level, students should be able to benefit from the entire unit. Especially those that are planning to move or attend school in one of the states mentioned. Some teachers may be interested in using the bankruptcy portion in an economics class. Overall, I recommend the high school level.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Business Law and History, grades 9-12)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Adolescence Teenage Rights American History Regions Regionalism Business Law Contemporary Law
</i>
</p>
</body>