---
layout: "unit"
title: "16.03.04: Citizenship and Identity through the Lens of a Presidential Campaign"
path: "/curriculum/units/2016/3/16.03.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Citizenship and Identity through the Lens of a Presidential Campaign"
unitAuthor: "Medea E. Lamberti-Sanchez"
---
<main>
<h2>
Introduction
</h2>
<p>
The unit will teach basic lessons about civics and democracy through the lens of the Presidential election.  The goal of the unit is to help students understand the importance of voting and participation while building their knowledge of the election system. The unit will encourage your students to think about government in a new way and connect this remarkable election to their day to day lives.
</p>
<p>
Teachers are all aware of how hard it is to teach basic civics lessons to students. Civics and democracy matter tremendously, but they can seem very vague and abstract to students. The goal of this unit is to use the Presidential election as a lens to teach basic civic lessons. The presidential election provides one real-world example after another about why elections matter, and this election in particular raises important issues related to citizenship and identify. For instance,  the presence of a serious female candidate for President, following on the heels of the election of  our first African American President, raises serious questions about who has gained the right to vote over time and the importance of voting. Voting is one of the most important civic duties that one can carry out, yet so many people choose not to vote.  Voting is an expression of individuality, opinion, and independence; yet many citizens are opting not to exercise their rights and remain a voice unheard. You might even say that the fierce competition between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton is forcing some to revisit their  own ideas of what citizenship and identity means to them.
</p>
<p>
For some Americans, the thought of having a woman in power is surprising, and maybe even taboo, but others glory in the idea of having a female presence in the White House. At the very least, Hillary Clinton’s campaign is a legacy of the women who gathered together at Seneca Falls over two hundred years ago to exercise their right to be heard, in a world where politicians thought women should be seen and not heard. Education matters enormously for the next generation and its ability to carry out its civic duties. Although the 21st century is ever-changing, the views of the past influence us today. Moreover, children are often heavily influenced by their parents and need to learn to think independently about these issues.
</p>
<p>
The unit will allow students to form their own political judgments based on their own discovery of the information using a multi-sensory approach.  The goal is to challenge their thinking through a variety of articles, videos, and books about the topics they are interested in learning about.  The background knowledge that the students acquire through this unit will help them to make their own choices about our leaders, candidates, and the basic rights that everyone possesses.
</p>
<p>
While I plan to teach this unit in the first marking period, during the Presidential election, the unit will work at any point during the next few years as students process the results of the election.  It is primarily a Social Studies and/or civics unit, but it may also be adapted to fit the grade-level the teacher is teaching. History teachers may benefit the most from the unit, but  Language Arts teachers may also benefit since there are many opportunities for close reading, analyzing sources, and examining articles and books for citing resources. It can take up to a month to complete the unit, so it is best to begin it late September and continue into October.
</p>
<h2>
Background Information
</h2>
<p>
The proposed unit,
<em>
Citizenship and Identity through the lens of the Presidential Campaign
</em>
, will be taught to  my sixth-grade Language Arts and Social Studies students at Betsy Ross Arts Magnet School in New Haven, Connecticut.  I am a Regular Education teacher.  My classes are rich in diversity. My students fall into three categories: Caucasian, African American, and Hispanic. The ability levels of the students range from basic-leveled learners to advanced-leveled learners.  The students have wonderful conversations about their experiences, cultural backgrounds and ethnicities. Students can share common perspectives, and learn from each other’s unique perspectives. These student-led conversations help stimulate richer relationships.
</p>
<p>
Betsy Ross Arts Magnet School is a middle school for students in grades five through eight. It serves urban and suburban students from surrounding areas of New Haven. Betsy Ross is founded on the principle that through the arts, students will think, learn, and see their academics in an innovative, challenging way.  Our students are artistic, creative young people with a strong interest in the arts that is shown through their poetry writings, group presentations, and performances in the theatre, dance showcases, and the annual arts shows. The school provides a performance platform for the students to showcase their ideas artistically through portraits, sculptures, videos, etc.  For this reason, the unit will include visual aids like videos, photographs, images, and entertainment focal points (e.g. music or dance.) In addition, technology will be incorporated throughout the unit so that the students can type responses in Google Chrome in order to create a slideshow or document.
</p>
<h2>
Rationale
</h2>
<p>
The motivation for this unit came from a discussion I had with my class about the presidential race. I was quite surprised by how much the election had affected them, how varied their reactions were, and the gaps in their knowledge about the election process. Even though the election is months away, many had made up their minds about who they would vote for. Some students said that their parents are refusing to vote because of what the candidates represent, while other students are fearful of what might become of their families and the nation if Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton becomes president.  Others have said that even though their households are divided between Democrats and Republicans, they are not swayed either way to vote for candidate.  Some of my students are quite cynical. One of my students said that, “the candidates will not follow through with their stands on the issues.” Some had fairly sophisticated sense of the issues, while others were having trouble sorting truth from fiction. All of the students were curious about the people behind the personas and interested in finding out if the candidates would be true to their word, or just making promises that cannot be kept.
</p>
<p>
It was just as surprising to hear the students’ reactions to comments about voting during our discussion. One student said that even though voting is a right that we all share, it is not something he plans on doing when he gets older because politicians are dishonest.  I found it heartbreaking that my young students were already giving up on the right to vote. I designed the unit because I wanted to think hard about how we, as educators, can change our students’ mindsets about politics and their civic duty to vote. I want to teach my students why the right to vote is so important by leveraging their interest in this election. For the majority of the students, the background knowledge about the upcoming Presidential elections is the key to enhancing their comprehension of the subject matter.  I hope not only to answer the students’ questions, but to help them draw conclusions about the importance of exercising their basic rights.  I also hope they will understand the facts and correct the  misinformation they picked up.  The current election makes it clear why the past matters so much.  Once the students have the right historical framework, their understanding of the past will become more applicable to the present.  Student-centered discussions can build upon prior knowledge, so that the students can filter information and teach others about it during whole-group instruction. The lessons will initiate purposeful class discussions and will provide the students a chance to showcase their knowledge using a variety of visual arts (dance, theatre, technology), in addition to the art of speaking and listening.
</p>
<p>
Whether or not Hillary Clinton is elected president, her candidacy raises crucial questions about  voting rights, the fight for gender equality, and the reasons so few women run for governmental positions. The election thus provides a perfect opportunity for discussing why women are underrepresented in the government and will allow us to look at statistics of female occupancy in the House and Senate.  The unit’s theme will get even more specific as it examines key people from the suffrage movement.  We will start with historical figures like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony and then progress toward modern day Geraldine Ferraro- all of whom, paved the way for our current Presidential candidate, Hillary Clinton. This study of specific women will allow students to see the connection between the women’s struggle for equality and our present-day Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton, as she tries to win the White House.
</p>
<p>
The unit will include reading, writing, and researching. The new background  knowledge that the students will acquire will invite vivid connections to the real world and get the students actively involved in their own learning. The unit will appeal to students who are auditory, visual, kinesthetic, and linguistic learners because it deploys multiple resources throughout the unit.
</p>
<h2>
Objectives
</h2>
<p>
The reading and writing  objectives for this unit will align with the Common Core State Standards and will consist of students being able to draw information from multiple and digital resources to develop and organize their writing in a concise manner. Students will be offered a variety of ways to engage in meaningful discussions, work both cooperatively and independently, and express shared ideas about the presidential election. The students will also learn how the system of voting works, and why it is so important for people to vote.
</p>
<p>
Students will also learn why women in government have a difficult time running for a position in power, and address the stigma surrounding women in politics. The objective is to get the students to brainstorm about these topics and open up a discussion about them. The students will be challenged to think about gender discrimination in government as well as the link between the work Hillary Clinton is doing and the work that the suffragists did to improve the rights of all women. The unit will use real-world connections to teach the students not just about voting, but about party platforms and political parties. Through concrete examples, pictures, videos, and illustrations, those connections will become clearer;  and should stimulate by the possibilities of higher-order thinking and conversations.
</p>
<h2>
Goals of the Unit
</h2>
<p>
The overall goal of the unit is to provide an introduction to the American political system. On the substantive side, students will form a strong foundation that will help them make educated, informed choices about the electoral processes and encourage civic engagement.  By the end of the unit, students should understand how political parties facilitate democratic choice by giving voters cues and shorthand to vote upon.  The students should understand that parties are crucial to the candidates and help voters decide what information is the most important for them to process and analyze. The students will be able to write an effective narrative about a woman suffragist based on the information presented through readings, photographs, writings, and selected videos. The readings will build comprehension and provide access to the topics that they will need in order to successfully complete the capstone project, which is a political commercial.  The students will also gain better listening and speaking skills since the majority of activities ask the students to confer with their peers and share materials that they have researched or created. With the foundations of the democracy laid, the students will be able to identify clear reasons as to why democracy matters and how it provides them with an opportunity to effect change, or fight for an issue that they care deeply about.
</p>
<h2>
Strategies for the Unit
</h2>
<p>
The strategies for the unit consist of teaching the students how to read and summarize informational articles, books, and view multiple visual aids like photographs to determine meaning. The reading lessons will focus on conducting and building research skills in order for the students to draw conclusions and make inferences about characters and settings, and build knowledge of the past events. In addition, the students will learn various strategies for note-taking. Other key strategies include teaching the students how to accurately cite information and use it to effectively to elaborate on their journal entries. The students will also need editing and revising strategies, so that they can look at their work to determine if it is grammatically correct. In addition, the unit will teach students how to cite sources.
</p>
<p>
A great strategy for teaching about how to cite sources and use technology effectively is to ask the Library Media Specialist to co-teach a class with you. He or she can help the students by showing them which sites are trustworthy and which ones are not good to use for information.  Other worthwhile strategies include a whole-group lesson on generating good questions to ensure their research is effective.  The questions are the key for gathering essential knowledge about the topic of interest. The questions also help students organize their thoughts into categories that they can use later on. Teachers can help students organize their thinking by encouraging them to to ask themselves why this topic is so interesting and what do they need to know about it. It is also useful to encourage the students to think critically about the information they are reading by asking them to make predictions and encourage them to wonder about the materials provided. The key is to find questions that will help guide the research by narrowing the focus, ensuring they understand the topic, and helping them decipher what is the most vital pieces of information that can be taken from the materials.
</p>
<p>
Another helpful strategy is to teach the students about differing perspectives, since the point of the journal entries is to write from the person’s point of view. Teaching students how to show empathy for the characters, is a great way for the students to write effectively. Modeling how to effectively write one of these journal entries can assist the struggling learners. Students should also have a visual representation of the task, as this will assist those who are visual and auditory learners. Similarly, books that are accompanied by audio are extremely helpful to those who need extra reading support.
</p>
<p>
Lastly, cooperative learning is a strategy that is often looked over. Teaching students to work together is a huge task. A lot of times students do not want to work with those who they don’t get along with, don’t like, or don’t care to be around.  But, teaching students to be tolerant of other students especially  unpopular students is an important lifelong skill.
</p>
<h2>
Student Resources
</h2>
<p>
The students will have multiple opportunities to look at fiction, nonfiction, and internet resources in order to conduct their research surrounding the major topics addressed in the unit. The majority of the books will focus on the right to vote.  Some will focus on women’s right to vote, while others will address topics in the presidential campaign like political parties. In addition to book resources, the students will also view specialized articles from the
<em>
Time for Kids
</em>
magazines, websites focused for children on the election, and photographs that will provide a pictorial representation of the elections. Some of the books that I chose to highlight are:
<em>
The Day the Women Got to Vote, a Photo History of the Women’s Rights Movements, Women’s Right to Vote, and Created Equal: Women’s Campaign for the Right to Vote.
</em>
I chose these books because there are excellent examples of photographs, historical facts, and scenarios of events that took place during the time period. Other books include
<em>
How Do We Elect Our Leaders, The Nineteenth Amendment,
</em>
and
<em>
The Politician. The Politician
</em>
highlights character traits that define an ideal leader.  The students can reference this book when they begin the culminating project and have to choose human characteristics for their avatar character. In the book titled
<em>
How Do We Elect Our Leaders,
</em>
the students can use this book to get an inside look at political parties, the election process, and the Electoral College. I will use excerpts from these books to pinpoint, or highlight the daily lives of people. These books also contain thought-provoking statistics that would be useful to prompt questions.
</p>
<p>
The last two books that I should mention are
<em>
The Congress of the United States
</em>
and
<em>
A True Book: The Bill of Rights
</em>
. These two books lay the foundation or the framework of the government. Students will learn about the first ten amendments and can understand who the original Framers were. The book should help students understand the perspective of those who originally created our constitutional democracy and understand how it evolved into our current government system.  I have named these books as a beginning to the unit, but as the unit moves and progresses, more resources will be used.
</p>
<p>
Videos are helpful learning prompts, and
<em>
Youtube
</em>
has a variety of  good videos to explain the presidential election like
<em>
Jimmy Kimmel talks to kids about politics with Hillary Clinton
</em>
and
<em>
Jimmy and Kids rate the Presidential candidates.
</em>
Both these videos are about ten minutes, but they showcase young children’s opinions about leaders and government.
</p>
<p>
In addition to videos and books, there are internet resources like
<em>
Scholastic.com
</em>
,
<em>
Time for Kids.com, PBS.org,
</em>
and others where students can find interactive games, trivia games, and webquests to enhance their learning. The website
<em>
congressforkids.net
</em>
is excellent because it is an interactive website that is fun-filled, appealing, and engaging for middle school children. Needless to say, videos should be deployed with appropriate note-taking and organizing strategies.
</p>
<h3>
Topics of Coverage
</h3>
<h4>
Voting Rights
</h4>
<p>
The Presidential election provides a great pathway for discussing the right to vote. Needless to say, there are always controversies over who can vote and whether or not politicians are making it harder for people to vote in order to increase their chances of winning the election. These controversies provide a good way to introduce the fact that voting is a basic civic right that belongs to everyone regardless of race, color, or gender. Not everyone is granted this right in other countries.  Even in our own country, some groups (felons, non-citizens) can’t cast a ballot.
</p>
<p>
Given that our country just elected its first black president and may be in the process of electing its first female president, the election is a great vehicle for talking about the limits once placed on voting and the path toward a more inclusive democracy. Voting, during the early days, was limited to white men who owned property.  It wasn’t until after the Civil War that the Fifteenth Amendment gave the right to vote to all men.Even then, it wasn’t until after the Civil Rights movement in the 1960’s that African Americans in the South were able to exercise their franchise. Women also did not get the right to vote until the Nineteenth Amendment was passed in 1920. The right to vote was expanded with the 26th Amendment, which allowed, eighteen year olds to vote.  In addition, those who have disabilities were granted the right to vote under the federal law, as well as those whose first language is not English. Today, more people vote in the presidential elections than in any other kinds of election.
</p>
<h4>
Women: From Elizabeth Cady Stanton to Geraldine Ferraro to Hillary Clinton
</h4>
<p>
A woman’s sphere is her home, right? Well, this was the case for women in the 1840’s. Her job was to stay at home and tend to her family and husband, and almost all of her legal rights were limited. Women were not allowed to vote, let alone hold public office. Women were believed to be too weak and emotional to be a part of the governmental process.  Even in the domestic sphere, she was believed to have belonged to her husband, as were her children, and her property.
</p>
<p>
As this election makes clear, it wasn’t just having the right to vote that led Hillary Clinton’s candidacy. There also had to be a change in social norms. Women fought for change, and worked hard to be the leaders of true reform. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, along with other brave women, decided to take a stand. She, along with Lucretia Mott believed that it was unfair to exclude women from voting and politics. They held a women’s rights convention to try to change the way women were treated. They wrote the Declaration of Sentiments, modeled after the Declaration of Independence, and included a revolutionary piece about voting. Both women and men signed the petition, with the women’s right to vote the main issue at hand. Later, Susan B. Anthony joined the movement and formed a partnership that lasted fifty years.  It was because of these women and other women’s tireless efforts that the independent woman awakened, and a political movement began to take shape. Women fought long to gain their rights, from 1848 to 1920. We can see the fruits of their victory. Women enjoy rights that would have been thought implausible a century ago. More recently, Geraldine Ferraro, was one of the first woman to earn a Vice Presidential nomination in 1984, paving the way for Hillary Clinton’s historic presidential bid. Clinton first sought the nomination in 2008. She is now the frontrunner for the Democratic Party.
</p>
<p>
The 2016 presidential election showcases and connects the themes of this unit beautifully. They all weave together so well that it makes sense for the teacher to teach the importance of voting in conjunction with the progression of women’s rights. The students will see through this unit that Clinton’s historic candidacy raises many questions about citizenship and democracy.
</p>
<h4>
Political Parties
</h4>
<p>
The 2016 election also provides substantial opportunities to discuss the crucial role that political parties play in our democracy.  This section will be a pivot point for student discourse because there are so many ways students can think about political parties and their impact on democracy.  All students need is a brief background on what parties are and why they matter. Students should learn that political parties elect officials to represent their parties political views. Political parties provide a way for voters to easily identify representatives who share their views. The impact of political parties on our democracy is evident. It is also important for students to note that the one of the jobs of a political party and its platform is to persuade others to vote for their candidates.  It would be interesting to discuss with students whether a group or party platform could sway their vote. I would challenge the students to think about how the slogans of the political parties influence the way people vote. Do people vote based on the catchy slogans, the colors of the advertisement, or the power of the candidate’s rhetoric? How much do political parties really help their candidates?
</p>
<h4>
Why do women tend not to run for government?
</h4>
<p>
The fact that there have been so few women who have run for President raises another important topic that will be covered briefly in this unit, Women are underrepresented in the world of politics, and students should understand why. Students will discuss the stereotypes associated with women and the relationship of those stereotypes to views on leadership. We will then connect those stereotypes to obstacles Hillary Clinton has faced in running for president. This will open up the conversation for students to pose their opinions about why they think women have a difficult time winning office. I will also introduce statistics on women holding office in Connecticut and see if this changes their perspectives.  Several articles will be offered for evidence, and students will be challenged to think in a different way about women in general. This lesson will discuss evolving gender roles, and will contrast the viewpoints of the 1800s to today’s views of women.  Students can compare and contrast the roles women played and dive into the reasons why women do not run for office in much greater detail. There will be a lot of overlap with the prior two topics as well as many opportunities to show students real world connections.
</p>
<h2>
Classroom Activities
</h2>
<p>
Classroom activities will include viewing multiple resources, both print and digital in order to get a good understanding of the government and provide a stimulation of mental pictures or images that the students can become excited to learn about. There will be three classroom activities that the teachers can modify and adjust according to the needs of the students. These activities may take up to three classroom sessions and cannot be finished within one fifty minute class period.
</p>
<h4>
Classroom Activity One: Voter Informational Brochure/Poster
</h4>
<p>
This first part of the activity will teach the students about voting rights by having them create an informative poster or brochure on the topic. They will use the knowledge that they collected through discussions and by visiting The Democracy Project at http://www.pbs.org,  There the students will see an interactive voting booth. The student clicks on the selective topics on the booth, and he or she can electronically cast his or her own votes about what issue matters or be transported into another time period to learn about people that impacted voting rights. Students can read about the qualifications for voting in the United States and other states, and  they can see why voting matters to the world around them.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Goal:
</strong>
The goal of the activity is for the students to understand that the choices they make impact the future they will occupy.  The students need to recognize that if they do not exercise their right to vote, then change won’t happen.  Voting allows people to take a stand and exert power over an issue they feel strongly about. This lesson is centered around this ideal.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Materials:
</strong>
white chart paper, colored pencils, crayons, markers, computers, construction paper, scissors, glue, and notetaking outline.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Length of Time:
</strong>
52 minute class period x 4 days, if possible.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Preparation:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Prior to the distribution of computers, students will be shown the website and explained the notetaking outline carefully.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Activity:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
How can you be a part of an election? The poster must encourage young people to get involved and be a part of a democratic society.  Students can brainstorm ways for them to become involved in debates, community issues, or important causes that require change.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Discussion:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Before, during, and after the project is completed the students will be talking about what facts should be included in the posters and decide how the project will be presented.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Closure:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The students will present their projects to the class, and
</p>
<h4>
Classroom Activity Two: Political Parties
</h4>
<p>
Since the focus of this activity is for the students to understand the purpose of political parties, they will be researching and creating a political commercial to advertise the party platforms and the role of the parties.
</p>
<p>
The students will read
<em>
The Origins and Functions of Political Parties: An Encyclopedic article from Grolier Online and the New Book of Knowledge.
</em>
They will also view the book,
<em>
How do we Elect our Leaders
</em>
, in order to read about Political Parties and the symbols that represent them.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Goal:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The goal of this activity is for students to describe what the Democratic or Republican party symbolizes, and explore the party’s ideals, morals, and values.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Materials:
</strong>
chart paper, colored pencils, crayons, markers, computers, construction paper, scissors, glue, and pictures of the topics printed from the computer.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Length of Time:
</strong>
52 minute class period x 4 days, if possible.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Preparation:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The students will be given the book and the article to read and discuss cooperatively. Next, the students will list issues that they care about, i.e. school culture, environment, uniforms, etc. They will discuss the issues that are of common interest.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Activity:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Students will read, analyze, and take notes on political parties. They will decide the common interests that they have and share the ideas. The teacher will explain to the students that people within the parties have differing opinions and it is perfectly fine to disagree, but they must identify the common interest that binds them together.  Next, the students will decide upon a symbol to represent their beliefs and a list of current issues that ties them together. They will then construct the slogan and symbol. The students can vote on the symbol, if everyone does not agree.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Discussion:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Is there a relationship between political parties and voting? How does understanding the political platforms allow people to make educated decisions about voting for the candidate of their choice? These questions facilitate brainstorming and discourse about the connection between these two topics.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Closure:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The students will present their slogans, symbols, and ideas for their campaign commercials.
</p>
<h4>
Classroom Activity Three:  From a Woman's Portrait to Hillary Clinton
</h4>
<p>
The students will learn about the suffrage movement by writing about and titling photographs of suffragette leaders. The students will then view a picture of Hillary Clinton and compare/and or contrast the historical significance of her candidacy to the movement of the suffragists.
</p>
<p>
Students will view photographs of women from the Library of Congress website: http://www.loc.gov/teachers/classroom/classroommaterials/womens-suffrage and read articles on the history of women’s suffrage. The photographs depict portraits of women who worked to create a change in the area of voting rights.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Goal:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The objective for the students is to read and examine primary sources in order to learn the historical background of women’s suffrage and connect it to voting rights and, ultimately, the candidacy of Hillary Clinton.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Materials:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Pencils, pens, computers, library of congress website and handout, and writer’s notebook
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Length of Time:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The activity can take up to two class periods to complete, and the narrative writing should be completed through writer’s workshop.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Preparation:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
Students should observe these photos, first with the teacher modeling the strategies for noticing details and formulating questions about the photos. Once the teacher has modeled the activity, then the students can try as a group or individually.  In addition, the students should review the elements of narrative writing.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Activity:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The students will be making inferences and predictions about the photos and use them in a narrative story written from the perspective of the woman in the photo. The students will also view the campaign posters of the women and their slogans for voting rights. After examining the posters, pictures, and articles, the students will take notes on the photographs using the Analyzing photos and prints handout from the Library of Congress website.
</p>
<p>
Students will also view pictures of Hillary Clinton, and her campaign slogan and draw conclusions about her attempt to change the views of the people about voting for a female president. Students can choose to connect what she is aiming to do to change people’s perspectives, and what the women suffragists were proposing.
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Discussion:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The teacher may ask the students to find the link between the work of these leaders to the work and to the work Hillary Clinton wants to do. Can you compare/contrast Hillary Clinton to the women suffragists?
</p>
<p>
<strong>
Closure:
</strong>
</p>
<p>
The students can brainstorm the answers to these questions or any question raised throughout this lesson, and think about how far women have progressed over the years, and are still progressing with the historical nomination of Clinton.
</p>
<h2>
Student Resources
</h2>
<p>
<small>
Bausum, Ann.
<em>
With Courage and Cloth: Winning the Fight for a Woman's Right to Vote
</em>
. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic, 2004.  A narrative depicting the story of women’s suffrage through photographs.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Benoit, Peter.
<em>
Women's Right to Vote
</em>
. Readers will read and understand why women were not allowed to vote until the 1920’s.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Brill, Marlene Targ.
<em>
Let Women Vote!
</em>
Brookfield, CT: Millbrook Press, 1996. This book discusses the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Bjorklund, Ruth.
<em>
Immigration,
</em>
New York, NY: Marshall Cavendish Corporation, 2012. Students will learn about the opposing viewpoints on Immigration.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Carmer, Carl, and Edwin John Stringham.
<em>
America Sings: Stories and Songs of Our Country's Growing
</em>
. New York: A.A. Knopf, 1942. Print.  This book highlights America’s history through twenty-nine songs, each devoted to America’s history.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Cooke, Donald Ewin.
<em>
America's Great Document - the Constitution
</em>
. Maplewood, NJ: Hammond, 1970. Print. The book illustrates the events leading up to the Constitutional Convention through illustrations and reproductions of historical paintings.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Cooper, Michael.
<em>
Things to Make and Do for George Washington's Birthday
</em>
. New York: Watts, 1979. Print. The author illustrates games and activities that children can do to celebrate George Washington’s birthday.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Gourley, Catherine.
<em>
Good Girl Work: Factories, Sweatshops, and How Women Changed Their Role in the American Workforce
</em>
. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook Press, 1999. This book depicts the role of women through pictures and photographs of women in the workplace.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Gutman, Dan, and Scott Shina.
<em>
The Kid Who Ran for President
</em>
. Prince Frederick, MD: Recorded, 2001. Print. A fiction story that depicts a twelve-year old boy running for President.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Hiebert, Roselyn, and Ray Eldon Hiebert.
<em>
Franklin Delano Roosevelt; President for the People
</em>
. New York: F. Watts, 1968. Print. A biographical account of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Lomask, Milton.
<em>
"I Do Solemnly Swear ... ": The Story of the Presidential Inauguration
</em>
. N.Y.: Ariel, 1966. Print. The book focuses on the debates of the Inauguration.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Lyons, John Henry.
<em>
Stories of Our American Patriotic Songs
</em>
. New York: Vanguard, 1942. Print. The book highlights America through patriotic songs that represent the nation.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Ortiz, Victoria.
<em>
Sojourner Truth, a Self-made Woman
</em>
. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1974. The story focuses on the true account of Sojourner Truth.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Peterson, Judy Monroe.
<em>
The Nineteenth Amendment: Women's Right to Vote
</em>
. Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers, 1998. The book focuses on the history of the nineteenth amendment.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Quiri, Patricia Ryon.
<em>
The Bill of Rights
</em>
. New York: Children's Press, 1998. A detailed book that discusses the importance of the Bill of Rights.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Rossi, Ann.
<em>
Created Equal: Women Campaign for the Right to Vote, 1840-1920
</em>
. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic, 2005. A brief history of women’s suffrage.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Sanna, Ellyn.
<em>
Careers with Character: Special Education Teacher
</em>
. Broomall, PA.: Mason Crest Publishers, 2003. The book outlines the characteristics of good citizens.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Sullivan, George.
<em>
The Day the Women Got the Vote: A Photo History of the Women's Rights Movement
</em>
. New York: Scholastic, 1994.  A book that uses photographs to explain the women’s rights movement.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Taylor-Butler, Christine.
<em>
The Congress of the United States
</em>
. New York: Children's Press, 2008. A detailed book that discusses the United States Congress.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Tegland, Janet.
<em>
George Washington ; the Inspiring True-life Story of the First President ; Exec. Ed.: Janet Tegland, M.A. Distributed by Journal Media and Publishing
</em>
. Davco, 1976. Print. A biographical account of George Washington’s life.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Thomas, William.
<em>
How Do We Elect Our Leaders?
</em>
Pleasantville, NY: Gareth Stevens, 2008. A book that invites the reader to understand the process of electing a leader.
</small>
</p>
<h2>
Internet Resources
</h2>
<p>
<small>
http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/origins-and-functions-political-parties. The subject of the article is the function of political parties and the historical background of party platforms.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/articles/voting-united-states. The articles on the website pertain to voting and the history of voting.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
http://www.edutopia.org. This website is used for Election Lesson plans and Digital resources
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
http://www.pbs.org/This website links teachers to the Democracy Project.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
http://www.voki.com. This website is used for making the avatars of your choice.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news-leadership The article focuses on leadership qualties and values of those elected officals.
</small>
</p>
<h2>
Teacher Resources
</h2>
<p>
<small>
Baker, Kevin. “Political Party Meltdown”. Accessed 5/10/16 http://www.nytimes.com.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
The article discusses the tension between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Drew, Richard. “Women’s Equality Party Pushes for Women’s Rights on the Ballot”.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Accessed 5/10/2016. The article discusses the push for women to run for government offices.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
The article discusses the push for women on the election ballot.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Elliott, Philip. “The Brief: Hillary’s new Plan to Trump Trump-by being boring.” An article expressing Hillary’s plan to use her personality to push out her competitor.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Fang, Marina. “Women are Underrepresented in Politics, but it’s not for the reason you think”.accessed 5/13/2016. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ An article focusing on interesting reasons why women are extremely unrepresented in politics.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Grolier, “Women’s Suffrage” Accessed 5/9/16. http://www.teacher.scholastic.com/activities/suffrage/history.htm This particular article provides a background on women’s suffrage.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Imbornoni, Ann-Marie.”Women’s Rights Movement in the U.S.” Accessed 5/9/16. http://www.infoplease.com/spot/womenstimeline3.html A timeline of events in women’s history that begins in 1848 and continues to 1920.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Silbey, Joel H. “The Origins and Development of U.S. Political Parties, 1790-1861.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Guide to U.S. Political Parties: 78-90. Print. This article illustrates the historical development of political parties.
</small>
</p>
<p>
<small>
Women’s Bureau, U.S. Department of Labor. “Equal Pay: A Guide to Women’s Equal Pay Rights”. Accessed April 2012. http://www.dol.gov/wb. An article designed to help working women understand their rights in the workplace.
</small>
</p>
<h2>
Appendix A: Implementing District and State Standards
</h2>
<p>
After completing this unit, the students will have worked on the following Connecticut Common Core Standards for Reading and Writing:
</p>
<h2>
Common Core Standards-Speaking and Listening Skills
</h2>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1: Engage effectively in a range of collaborative one on one, in groups, and teacher led with diverse partner on grade 6 topics, texts, and issues building on each other’s ideas and expressing their own clearly.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1.B: Follow rules for collegial discussions, set specific goals and deadlines, and define individual roles as needed
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1D: Review the key ideas expressed and demonstrate understanding of multiple perspectives through reflection.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL 6.5: Include multimedia components (graphics, images, music, sound, and visual displays in presentations to clarify information.
</p>
<h2>
Common Core Standards: Reading and Writing Standards
</h2>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3A: Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using effective techniques and descriptive details as well as well structured event sequences.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3.B: Use narrative techniques, such as a dialogue pacing and description to develop experience, events, and characters
</p>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3.D: Use phrase words, and relevant descriptive details and sensory languages to convey experiences and events
</p>
<p>
CCSS RH.6.B.2: Determine the central ideas or information of primary or secondary sources to provide an accurate summary of the source distinct from the prior knowledge or opinions
</p>
<p>
CCSS. RH. 6.B.3: Key Ideas and Details, Craft and Structure: determine the central idea of the text
</p>
<p>
CCSS. RH. B.4: Summarize  the text  helps the reader to determine the central idea.
</p>
</main>