---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 81.02.02"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1981/2/81.02.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "Pirates, Pieces of Eight and Pacific Nights"
unitAuthor: "Anthony F. Franco"
keywords: "Robert Louis Stevenson British Literature"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 7th and 8th grade English and Social Studies."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 81.02.02:
</h4>
“Pirates, Pieces of Eight and Pacific Nights” is a multidimensional unit designed for middle school English and Social Studies classes. The unit explores the Golden Age of piracy during the early Eighteenth Century and the lure of treasure which beckoned seamen and landlubbers alike.  The vehicle for exploration of these themes is the work of Robert Louis Stevenson through such classics as “Treasure Island,” “Kidnapped,” “The Strange case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, and “A Child’s Garden of Verses.”  The themes of piracy and treasure hunting are extended to include modern-day pirates, the appreciation of artifacts, and the strengthening of both philosophical and psychological values.  Robert Louis Stevenson was a master storyteller and students will learn of his personal background as well as those attributes which support his literary reputation.  The unit remains as a starting point for such additional activities as character sketches, map skills, current events, interviewing techniques and class discussions.  Teachers of high school students may wish to modify the suggested readings and use the unit in their classrooms.
<p>
(Recommended for 7th and 8th grade English and Social Studies.)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Robert Louis Stevenson British Literature
</i>
</p>
</body>