---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1989/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.01.x.html">89.01.01</a> <br/> Through the use of interviews, maps, and field trips, this unit promotes the inclusion of Puerto Rican students into the greater New Haven community. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.05.x.html">89.01.05</a> <br/> Through the use of music, this unit introduces students to the Harlem Renaissance. The units lesson plans include listening, writing, and research assignments. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.07.x.html">89.01.07</a> <br/> This unit examines an interdisciplinary approach to the teaching of community. Emphasis is placed on the arrival of African Americans and Italians in New Haven. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.08.x.html">89.01.08</a> <br/> Through the use of filmstrips, movies, novels, speakers, and trips, students will explore the plight of Haitians. This unit includes material on Haiti's social, economic, and political struggles. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.09.x.html">89.01.09</a> <br/> This unit examines the practice of lynchings in the United States from the 17th through the 20th century. It discusses the origin, practice, and rationale involved. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.10.x.html">89.01.10</a> <br/> This unit presents the "changing face" of Newhallville in New Haven. It includes a discussion of early as well as subsequent immigrants to this area of the city. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.11.x.html">89.01.11</a> <br/> Through the use of role-playing, maps, field trips, and writing, students will explore the development and redevelopment of the Dixwell community. This unit includes information about local businesses that are familiar to many African-American students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.12.x.html">89.01.12</a> <br/> By examining holidays, celebrations, art, dancing, and foods, this unit presents several ethnically and racially diverse groups. The groups included are Jewish, Greek, Italian, American Indian, Chinese, Irish, and Polish. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/1/89.01.13.x.html">89.01.13</a> <br/> Using the history of Varick African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, the oldest Black church in New Haven, students learn about the lives of prominent African-Americans. Unit lessons involve the use of books, videos, filmstrips, and field trips. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/2/89.02.03.x.html">89.02.03</a> <br/> An understanding of metaphor, alliteration, hyperbole, simile, folk ballads, sonnets, and verse is achieved through the use of poetry by African American writers. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/2/89.02.05.x.html">89.02.05</a> <br/> Through the lyrics of gospel, rap, R&amp;B, and pop music, students will explore the relationship between poetry and music. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/2/89.02.08.x.html">89.02.08</a> <br/> Using poetry by African American writers, this unit celebrates the accomplishments and struggles of black people in America. The unit contains a pertinent list of suggested poetry. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/2/89.02.09.x.html">89.02.09</a> <br/> Using cooperative and collaborative learning, students will study poetry by 20th century African American writers. This unit includes lessons that incorporate rap music. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/3/89.03.01.x.html">89.03.01</a> <br/> This unit uses fiction to explore the Latin American culture. Works used are by Latin American authors. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/3/89.03.02.x.html">89.03.02</a> <br/> This unit studies the contributions of Latin American culture to the U.S., the histories of Cuba and Puerto Rico, and the works of Latin American writers. This unit includes court cases that affected the Latin American community. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/3/89.03.03.x.html">89.03.03</a> <br/> This unit uses dance to teach and interpret writings by Latin American authors. Detailed lessons include valuable descriptions and diagrams that make the unit "user friendly." </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/3/89.03.04.x.html">89.03.04</a> <br/> Through the use of monologues by writers from diverse racial and ethnic groups, this unit explores familial relationships. Unit lessons also explore character, scene, and play analysis. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/3/89.03.05.x.html">89.03.05</a> <br/> Through the use of Spanish fairy tales and Puerto Rican folktales, this unit encourages the development of reading skills. Although designed for bilingual, special education, and ESL teachers, this unit may be used in any classroom. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/5/89.05.06.x.html">89.05.06</a> <br/> Through the use of poetry and short stories, this unit introduces the experiences of Jewish people in America and abroad. The main goal of the unit is to engage students in a discussion of prejudice and discrimination. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/5/89.05.08.x.html">89.05.08</a> <br/> Through the use of literature, field trips and guest speakers, this unit presents an overview of Blacks in America while presenting basic African beliefs and customs. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1989/5/89.05.11.x.html">89.05.11</a> <br/> This unit uses 20th century music and art to introduce students to the black experience in the U.S. The unit shows these art forms to be a means of expression and protest. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>