---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 91.03.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1991/3/91.03.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Use of John Johnson’s Life Story in Conjunction with Other Black Entrepreneurs as Role Models for Potential Black Businessmen"
unitAuthor: "Carol L. Cook"
keywords: "Autobiography Afro-American Business Leaders"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for General Business and other Business courses, grades 9-12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 91.03.04:
</h4>
Autobiographies can be used for many different purposes. I have studied the autobiography of John Johnson to see what character traits he used in his search for success. I have also reviewed the lives of Mary McLeod Bethune, Booker T. Washington, and Jake Simmons, Jr. to see what pattern emerges in all of their lives. I have compared the role models that each person followed in his/her search for success. I have compared how each person handled problems such as lack of credit associations, cast subordination and prejudice. I also observed the character traits that led each person to great achievement.
<p>
In these four autobiographies, we find a combination of these two things: subjective awareness and a “message.” We learn to understand each separate individual. At the same time, we are introduced to their social-historical lives. We are introduced to the life of a freed slave in Booker T. Washington’s autobiography. We became acquainted with the life of a Black in the early 1900s with Mary McLeod Bethune’s life. Then, we learned what life in the Southwest was for a Black person during the time of 1901 to 1981 with Simmons’ life. Finally, we learned what life was in Chicago from approximately 1918 to the present with Johnson’s life.
</p>
<p>
Each autobiography told us how the individuals handled the problems of each time. We certainly see that in all four cases, the individuals seemed to succeed with the same strengths: never giving up, ignoring failure, dealing with people of all races, having belief that they can succeed in anything that they do.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for General Business and other Business courses, grades 9-12)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Autobiography Afro-American Business Leaders
</i>
</p>
</body>