---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 99.04.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1999/4/99.04.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "Arousing a Child's Curiosity - What Is It?"
unitAuthor: "Gwendolyn Robinson"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Reading, Phonics, Comprehension, Coordinate Geometry, and Geography, grades 3-5."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 99.04.06:
</h4>
The purpose of this unit is to familiarize third through fifth graders with the key elements in detective fiction stories and to solve an unsolved mystery song.  Most detectives are looking and readers wondering What Is It?
<p>
In this unit you will use story mapping, semantic mapping, make a relief map, have fun with coordinate geometry (made easy), and discover or create What is in the Wooden Box.
</p>
<p>
The song goes like this:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<font size="-1">
<dt>
As I was walking by the beach on one bright, sunny day
<dt>
I saw a great big, wooden box a floating in the bay
<dt>
I picked it up and opened it up and what to my surprise
<dt>
Oh I discovered a (clap* clap* clap*) right before my eyes.
<dt>
Oh I discovered a (clap* clap* clap*) right before my eyes.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</font>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<font size="-1">
<dt>
I picked it up and ran to town as happy as a king
<dt>
I took it to a man I knew who'd buy most anything
<dt>
And this is what he said to me as I walked in his shop
<dt>
Oh get out of here with that (clap* clap* clap*) before I call the cop.
<dt>
Oh get out of here with that (clap* clap* clap*) before I call the cop.
<dt>
<dt>
I picked it up and turned around a running for my life.
<dt>
And then I went to take it home to give it to my wife.
<dt>
But this is what she said to me as I walked in the door
<dt>
Oh get out of here with that (clap* clap* clap*) and don't come back no more.
<dt>
Ih get out of here with that (clap* clap* clap*) and don't come back no more.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</font>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<font size="-1">
<dt>
The moral of this story is if you are on the beach
<dt>
And you should see a wooden box and it's within you reach
<dt>
Don't ever try to pick it up is my advice to you
<dt>
Cause you'll never get rid of that (clap* clap* clap*) no matter what you do.
<dt>
Oh you'll never get rid of that (clap* clap* clap*) no matter what you do.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</font>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Students and teachers alike will enjoy coming up with possible contents of the box.  The lessons this unit teaches will help you come to your conclusion.  CMT helpful.  A teacher friendly unit.
<p>
(Recommended for Reading, Phonics, Comprehension, Coordinate Geometry, and Geography, grades 3-5.)
</p>
</body>