---
layout: "unit"
title: "87.01.03: Three Short Stories from Latin America"
path: "/curriculum/units/1987/1/87.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Three Short Stories from Latin America"
unitAuthor: "José Delgado"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 87.01.03:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
I. Rationale
</li>
<li>
II. About The Authors
</li>
<li>
III. “Un d’a de estos”, by Gabriel Garc’a Márquez.
</li>
<li>
IV. “El asesino desinteresado Bill Harrigan”,  by Jorge Luis Borges.
</li>
<li>
VI. Footnotes
</li>
<li>
VII. Other Works By Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</li>
<li>
VIII. Teacher’s Bibliography  on Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</li>
<li>
Bibliography
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/1987/1/87.01.03.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<h2>
I. RATIONALE
</h2>
The readers I have in mind for this unit are primarily third year students of Spanish as well as native speakers with a need to improve their reading skills. Each selection has a “Base Vocabulary”, which is available for the reader so that he/she can fully grasp the meaning of the reading at hand. Difficult terms and idiomatic expressions which might also present problems for the reader are listed and explained. The unit contains a series of exercises designed to check reading comprehension at the end of each story. This skill acquired, the student will increase his/her ability to use words, common expressions, and idioms in a natural manner, in the target language. It is also hoped that his/her confidence and familiarity with the language will be enhanced.
<p>
The chosen selections have the added objective of developing pleasure in reading whole stories in Spanish which will serve as an incentive to learn more about Latin American culture. I have picked three short stories by three well known authors’ “Un d’a de estos”, by Gabriel Garc’a Márquez, “El asesino desinteresado Bill Harrigan”, by Jorge Luis Borges, and “Nos han dado la tierra”, by Juan Rulfo.
</p>
<p>
The student can look forward to exercises that will range from vocabulary drills, brief comments based on items found in the reading, replacing words written in Spanish for an English counterpart, grouping of words in which the students signal which word does not correspond to the same idea, as well as questions based on the reading itself. If the teacher wishes to expand the preparation of his/her students on what constitutes a short story, I strongly suggest he/she refer to the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute Curriculum Units gathered under the title
<i>
Reading the Twentieth Century Short Story
</i>
, compiled in 1983. The amount of resources available in that particular compilation, together with the well annotated and prepared plans, are of great value.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
II. ABOUT THE AUTHORS
</h2>
<i>
Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</i>
was born in Aracataca, Colombia March 6, 1928. As a novelist, Garc’a Márquez has known worldwide success because of his literary inventions. An inventor of cities, of entire families and, of time, he maintains that whatever he writes is about things that he knows and people he has seen.
<p>
Educated by Jesuits, he first thought of becoming a lawyer. Upon entering the university he realized that the streets were what attracted him. He stopped his studies. The mysteries of a large city, the enigma of the outsider who becomes the object of suspicion and hatred, the problems of possessions ingrained in socio-political dynamics were of far more interest to him than school rooms and term papers. He decided instead for a job with the newspaper
<i>
El Espectador
</i>
in Bogotá. During this time he read novels and stories by Franz Kafka, James Joyce and William Faulkner. In 1954 the newspaper assigned him to Europe, and he went to live in Rome. While there, he preferred to write articles concerning the cinema rather than daily events. He developed an interest in film direction and moved to Paris. Meanwhile in Bogotá, the newspaper closed down due to the ruthless governing of a Colombian dictator, Rojas Pinilla. Garc’a Márquez saw himself unemployed, awaiting the arrival of checks that never arrived, like in the case of a character from one of his novels,
<i>
El Coronel no tiene quien le escriba
</i>
. Thanks to a kind landlord, he was able to stay in France for a year without having to pay rent. Anecdotes say that the man took pity on him because he always saw Garc’a Márquez typing. He returned to Colombia and married Mercedes, who had been waiting four years for him. Together, they tried their luck in Caracas, the capital of Venezuela. From there they went to New York and then to Mexico, where Márquez could dedicate himself to the writing of films. During these years these were important activities, but not at all decisive. He was able to support his family by doing odd jobs. During this time he was preparing himself for the book that would propel him to fame and fortune. It was not until 1967 that his masterpiece,
<i>
Cien a–os de soledad
</i>
appeared. However, this is not to say that Garc’a Márquez had not published before then. In 1955 he published
<i>
La Hojarasca
</i>
, followed by
<i>
El Coronel no tiene quien le escriba
</i>
in 1961. In 1962 he published the novel
<i>
La mala hora
</i>
. By 1965 he was already working on
<i>
Cien a–os de soledad
</i>
, a story he had conceived of as a child, listening to the stories his grandmother told him, as well as the countless things his grandfather showed him. Of his grandparents, Garc’a Márquez says that they were responsible for the circumstances in which his novelistic world was formed. He says that when his grandmother died, things “got flat”. In his imagination the fantastic world of his grandparents, together with the routine of the town in which he lived, melted to form a life where there were no frontiers between the fantastic and the real. His grandma told him of the bloody civil wars of Colombia, with names of generals, regional leaders (caudillos) and presidents. Names and dates got convoluted. The child did not distinguish what was historical and what was fiction. From this world of remembrances, fantasies and unrealities,
<i>
Cien a–os de soledad
</i>
emerged, for which he was given the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1983.
</p>
<p>
Márquez is interesting because from his first novels, elements appeared which were to recur in later works, such as a “lonely town, cut off from the rest of civilization, and bitter political feuds that deaths and marriages cannot heal.”
<sup>
1
</sup>
Again and again in Garc’a Márquez’s stories, “a lonely proud individual asserts a sense of dignity despite a society in which brutality and corruption triumph.”
<sup>
2
</sup>
Distortion of reality and precise detail around the impossible are permanent qualities in Márquez’s work, His novels “remind us that in a continent conquered by men who had absorbed the novels of chivalry and were haunted by tales of
<i>
El Dorado
</i>
, a continent in which nature has a most invariably triumphed over man, the marvelous must have a place in literature.”
<sup>
3
</sup>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Jorge Luis Borges
</i>
was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina August 24,1899 and died in Switzerland in 1986. He is known as a writer of strong imagination. An avid reader, this portent of Latin American letters has talked about the faith he had in life, the love he felt for his country and ancestors, the wisdom which lies in our own personal God, his determination to defend his ideas and principles without compromise, and about what is commonly considered or talked of as “reality”. For his countrymen, he was not always an Argentine to the bone. For his admirers, a universal Argentine. Borges was always fascinated with mirrors and labyrynths. His stories are reflections of ideas and facts which are multiplied in the reader’s imagination until they acquire the fragility of the dreamlike, becoming confused with reality.
</p>
<p>
Borges was born in a comfortable household. His father was a lawyer, a linguist, and even wrote a novel. The family moved to Europe in order for Borges and his sister to receive their education. Borges has said many times that he learned to read in English before he did in Spanish, due to the availability of English magazines around his home. It was in English that he read his first novels, including the Quijote. He developed his style studying English as well as American literature. As a young man he formed part of a group known as Ultraists, i.e. beyond “isms”.
</p>
<p>
Borges’ character could perhaps be summed up with the following adjectives: daring, yet timid; a tireless chatter, nostalgic, ironic, a political reactionary; a sociable, yet private man. Between 1920 and 1930, Borges worked with great intensity. He read and studied the relations of China and India. He also read many philosophers, specially those of idealistic thought and absorbed the ideas of Nietzche. In his stories, Borges experiments with a subjective conception of time and with the idea that history can be considered as an eternal repetition of facts and begins within which limited and scarce possibilities can co-exist. In 1938, Borges suffered a septicemia or injury to his head, and spent several days in the hospital. While resting, he wrote various fantastic stories. He suggested that this incident (the injury to the head) changed the literary orientation of his work. He then published a series of strange stories and essays, which are not quite adventures or mysteries, but in them intrigue, facts, death, and duels of clues abound. From this point on, Borges became the master of intellectual games, strange plots, and unexpected endings. He resembles a narrator of police stories with a tint of philosophy and theology. In a sentence, “poetic meditation on illusion and reality, on dream and consciousness, were to become obsessive preoccupations.”
<sup>
4
</sup>
When he published
<i>
Historia Universal de la Infamia
</i>
, from which our selection is taken, he referred to it as “the irresponsible game of a timid man who did not have the drive to write stories and distracted himself by falsifying and apostasising the tales of others.”
<sup>
5
</sup>
In this collection the main characters are evil men and women of somewhat obscure historical importance revived in Borges’ imagination.
</p>
<p>
One of Borges’ constant themes is that of a man caught in a trap he has created himself. The fiction can take the form of historical investigation, literary criticism, description of an imaginary planet, a detective story or of an imaginary controversy. The core of these stories is “fortified” by footnotes and quotations which give the reader a probability of the fantastic mixed with descriptions of facts, which seem possible but weird at the same time. “Borges’s metaphysics reflect the madness that is there in reality.”
<sup>
6
</sup>
His tales are intertwined and quasi-revealed in a series of bibliographical references which hint at meanings that keep the reader guessing. The insinuations and many mysteries linked to contradictions of time and to characters caught in the trap of time and inner processes, perplexes and entertains the reader. It is required that the reader be an active one, looking for clues, willing to embark in a tunnel of his own, to either come out of it in triumph, or “defeated”, but stimulated by the exotic universe Borges presents.
</p>
<p>
For many years however, Borges searched for the chief genre that was to make him a renowned author. At first, he wrote essays which dealt with philosophical matters such as cyclical time theories, religions, the Cabbala, Gnostics, etc. In 1936 he published
<i>
Historia de la eternidad
</i>
, a group of essays dedicated to time and time philosophies, It wasn’t until
<i>
Ficciones
</i>
(1944) and
<i>
El Aleph
</i>
(1949) that Borges really found the best vehicle for his ideas: the short story. “I know that the least perishable part of my literary production is the narrative, yet for many years I did not dare to write stories. I thought that the paradise of the tale was forbidden to me.”
<sup>
7
</sup>
</p>
<p>
Borges’ work speaks to the modern man. His themes are varied and touch on such diverse areas as the philosophical, the socio-political, the psychological, and the religious. He is an Argentine who breaks away from the frontiers of his country and transcends his, as well as our own, panorama. His universalism attacks the present condition of the modern day homo sapiens who is much too happy or sad contemplating himself/herself, indifferent to others, Borges asserts the philosopher and sociologist in himself but through the expression of possibilities and transformation fiction can bring forth the lack of humanity in human societies. The main orbit of concentration relies on death. Death penetrates the Rulfian world: ambiance, things, people. Death is present in all of the stories, The Italian translation aptly carries the title of
<i>
La morte al Messico.
</i>
</p>
<p>
Rulfo’s narratives are told either in first or third person. Critics agree that he is at his best utilizing the first person. He is a master of the monologue, though he also receives high marks for his dialogues. But whatever the technique, Rulfo invariably describes the misfortunes of a large segment of humanity. The author himself has said that what he does is a transposition of the facts of his experience. Rulfo’s people grow not outwardly but rather inwardly. His monologues are carried by a strong hermeticism, as one could very well imagine people under such conditions would develop. One has the sense that the characters are chewing their words avoiding their coming forth. But come out they do, reveling to us a series of atrocious procedures. In “Nos han dado la tierra”, for instance, Rulfo deals with the theme of a group of men to whom the government has given a vast chunk of arid land. “Del pueblo pare acá es de ustedes”,
<sup>
8
</sup>
explains the government representative to the men. The campesinos proceed to cross the “llano” a metaphor for the government’s “generosity” towards its citizens. As they cross the vast arid valley, a single drop of water is witnessed by the men. The drop of water provides a brief moment of hope, but this promise quickly disappears, “dejando una plasta como la de un salivazo”.
<sup>
9
</sup>
Hope turns into anguish. It is from the title that one can find the deceit and the irony.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
III. “Un d’a de estos”, by Gabriel Garc’a Márquez.
</h2>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. BASE VOCABULARY (in order of appearance in story).
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. amaneció—(past tense of amanecer)-to dawn, to get light.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. tibio—tepid, lukewarm.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. dentadura postiza—false teeth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. molde de yeso—plaster cast.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. sin cuello—without a collar.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. cargadores elasticos—suspenders.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. enjunto—lean, skinny.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. fresa—type of machine used by dentists.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. pedaleando—pedalling.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. destemplada—disagreeable, unpleasant.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. puliendo—polishing.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. cartón—cardboard box.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
13. “te pega un tiro”—“he will shoot you”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
14. apresurarse-to hurry, to hasten.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
15. apoyada-leaning, resting, supported, propped.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
16. umbral-threshold, doorsill.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
17. herv’an-(imperfect tense of hervir)-to boil.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
18. olor glacial-frigid smell.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
19. pomos de loza-porcelain knobs.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
20. cancel de tela-folding screen made of cloth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
21. talones-heels.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
22. sin anestesia-without anaesthesia.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
23. absceso-abscess.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
24. cacerola-saucepan.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
25. pinzas-tweezers, pliers.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
26. escupidera-spitting place.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
27. aguamanil-washstand.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
28. cordal-wisdom tooth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
29. muela-back tooth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
30. gatillo-instrument for drawing teeth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
31. aferró-(past tense of aferrar)-to cling.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
32. crujido-creak; clatter.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
33. mand’bula-jaw.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
34. lágrimas-tears.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
35. jadeante-panting.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
36. desabotonó-unbuttoned.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
37. buscó a tientas-groped around for, felt around for.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
38. bolsillo-pocket.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
39. trapo-a cloth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
40. cielo raso-clear, cloudless sky.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
41. desfondado-without end.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
42. telara–a-spider web.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
43. buches de agua de sal-mouthfuls of salt water.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
44. displicente-disagreeable; cross, peevish.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
45. pasar la cuenta-to send the bill.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
46. “la misma vaina”-“the same thing”.
<dt>
B. EXERCISES
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1.a. complete the sentences with the appropriate word/s from the list at the end of this exercise.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Don Aurelio Escovar, era un dentista _____.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Su mirada pocas veces _____ a la situación.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. El alcalde quer’a que le _____una muela.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. El dentista pul’a ____ mientras hac’a esperar al alcalde.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. Por el dolor, el alcalde se hab’a _____ la mejilla izquierda pero no la derecha.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. El dentista le _____ al alcalde que hab’a que hab’a que hacer la operacióh “sin anestecia”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. El alcalde sintió un _____ helado en los ri–ones,
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. El dentista le dijo al alcalde que all’ pagaba por _____ muertos.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. Don Aurelio le recomienda al alcalde que hiciera buches de_____.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. Como era _____, la cuenta iba a ser pasada lo mismo al municipio que al alcalde.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
informó
<dt>
dientes de oro
<dt>
correspond’a
<dt>
afeitado
<dt>
veinte
<dt>
agua de sal
<dt>
sin t’tulo
<dt>
la misma vaina
<dt>
vacio
<dt>
sacasen
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2.a. Write the infinitive of the verb which corresponds to each word and translate into English.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. madrugador
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. ordenó
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. correspond’a
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. pedaleando
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. puliendo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. cambiado de expresión
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. acercaba
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. afirmó,
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. aferró
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. crujido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. desabotonó
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. despidió
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3.a. Choose the word/s from column B opposite in meaning to each word in column
<i>
A
</i>
.
<dt>
<i>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
A
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 1. amanecer
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 2. r’gido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 3. trabajando
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 4. guardar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 5. sacar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 6. apresurarse
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 7. desesperación
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 8. amargura
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 9. desabotonar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 10. displicente
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
B
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a. botar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
b. ternura
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
c. anochecer
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
ch. abotonar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
d. flágido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
e. poner
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
f. tranquilidad
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
g. descansado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
h. tomarse el tiempo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
i. desagradable
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4.a. Structures: form sentences or phrases using the given words. Refer to the story for the correct structures.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. dentadura/vidriera/de/postiza/la/sacó/una
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. muela/dice/una/el/sacas/alcalde/si/que/le
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. una/después/hizo/de/ocho/las/pausa
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. dedos/punta/la/cerró/los/gaveta/de/con
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. talones/boca/los/y/abrió/afirmó/la
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. ser/tiene/anestecia/que/sin
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. mirar/hizo/al/todo/alcalde/sin
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. trapo/el/le/un/limpio/dio/dentista
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. muertos/paga/teniente/nos/aqu’/veinte
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. la/-dijo/pasa/cuenta/me
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5.a. Comment briefly on the following.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. “una mirada que raras veces correspond’a a la situación.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. “el dentista vio en sus ojos marchitos muchas noches de desesperación.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. “sintió un vacio helado en los ri–ones.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. “Aqu’ nos page veinte muertos, teniente.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. “Es la misma vaina.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6.a. Answer the following questions in Spanish. Use full sentences. Create a paragraph.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
l. Además de ser dentista “sin titulo”, ¿qué era Don Escovar?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Describe su fisionom’a y carácter
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. ¿Qué hac’a Don Aurelio cuando llego su ni–o?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. ¿Que quer’a el alcalde?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. ¿Por qué estuvo de acuerdo Don Aurelio en hacer la operación? Crees tú que por el revolver que tra’a el alcaldé?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. ¿Qué hizo el alcalde cuando supo que la extirpación tendréia que ser “sin anestecia”?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. ¿Qué posible significado tienen pare t’ estas palabras:? “Aqui nos paga veinte muertos, teniente.”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. ¿Cómo estaba el alcalde luego de la operación?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. ¿Por qué, si es alcalde, le da al dentista un saludo militar?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. ¿Qué tipo de satisfacción obtuvo el dentista?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
IV. “El asesino desinteresado Bill Harrigan”,  by Jorge Luis Borges.
</h2>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
A. BASE VOCABULARY (in order of appearance in story).
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. desinteresado-desprendido, apartado del interés. disinterested, impartial.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Ilustre-illustrious, noble.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. fundamento-foundation, groundwork.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. vertiginosa-(adj.) transient disturbance of the judgement.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. meseta-elevated and flat terrain of great extension.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. pelado-(adj.) plucked, bare, hairless.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. pistoletazos-pistol shot, the shot of a wound.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. aturden-to perturb, to confuse.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. emisor-one who emits.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. veteado-striped, veined, streaky.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. reluciente-relucent, lucent, light, clear.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. conventillo-(dim.) convent.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
13. deb’a-owed.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
14. Irlandés-native of Ireland.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
15. catinga-(americanismo)-del Guaran’
<i>
Cati
</i>
, olor fuerte y desagradable propio de algunas plantas y animales// olor que las personas, especialmente los negros, exhalan.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
16. vientre-belly.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
17. mota-(american’smo) pelo crespo, especialmente el de los negros. kinky hair.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
18. primado-most prominent.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
19. pecas-freckles.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
20. crencha-the parting of the hair in two equal parts.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
21. esmirriádo-thin, tired, consumed.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
22. chúcaro-concave.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
23. soez-mean, vile, worthless.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
24. pandilla-gang.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
25. cloaca-sewer, a conduct for dirty water.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
26. niebla-fog, mist, haze,damp.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
27. fétido-fetid, stinking.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
28. desmorronaban-destroying little by little.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
29. cascotazo-hit on the head.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
30. restitu’an-returning to the place of departure.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
31. encanecido-(adj.) gray haired.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
32. envenedador-(adj.) poisoning.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
33. buhardilla-small garret.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
34. jorobada-(adj.)crooked, hunchback.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
35. volcaba, -upsetting, overturning, dumping.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
36. transeúnte-passer-by.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
37. balde-buckett.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
38. ahogaba-to suffocate, smother.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
39. en seguida-(idiom)right away, at once.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
40. pululaban-to swarm.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
41. arrebataban-to snatch, to carry away.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
42. saqueaban-to sack, plunder, pillage, loot.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
43. aprendizaje-apprenticeship.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
44. desde–aba-to scorn, disdain.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
45. presentimiento-presentiment, premonition.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
46. alcen el trapo-(idiom).
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
47. ponientes-sunsets.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
48. hacha-axe.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
49. demoledora-(adj.) to demolish.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
50. bisonte-bison, buffalo.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
51. despejado-clear, cloudless.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
52. desaforada-colossal, huge.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
53. acompasado-rhythmic; slow;easy going; cautious.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
54. pobló-populated.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
55. aculebrado-(adj.) like a serpent.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
56. taberna-bar, saloon.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
57. todopoderoso-almighty.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
58. destemplada-(adj.) unpleasant, irregular.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
59. agrietan-to crack.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
60. acodados-(adj.) elbow-shaped.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
61. fornidos-husky, sturdy, well built, robust.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
62. pendenciero-quarrelsom..
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
63. ostentación-ostentation, appearance.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
64. impasiblemente-impassively.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
65. Hay quienes hablan-(idiom) there are those who speak.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
66. aguardiente-brandy, moonshine, liquor.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
67. anonadan-to overwhelm, to humble.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
68. cimarrona-untamed, wild.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
69. laterales-lateral, at the sides.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
70. hijos de perras-sons of bitches.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
71. desaf’o-challenge, dare.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
72. susurran-to whisper.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
73. temerosamente-in a fearful or timid way.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
74. detonación-detonation, noise.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
75. retumba-to resound, to rumble.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
76. parapetado-sheltered, behind a parapet.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
77. cordon-cord, strand, string;a military cordon, formed by a line of troops to prevent any communication.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
78. intruso-intruder.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
79. reanuda-resumes
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
80. concede-to concede, to grant.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
81. apretones-(de mano), handshakes.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
82. adulaciones-flatteries, compliments.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
83. tiende su frazada-(phrase) spreads his blanket.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
84. muchachuelo-male youth.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
85. estribar-to lean, rest.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
86. vagabundo-vagabond, wanderer, roamer, (adj. in text)
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
87. troperos-cowboys.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
88. burdeles-brothels.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
89. arrastraban-to drag, impel.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
90. lucidez-lucidness, brilliancy, brightness.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
91. squeado-to consider with disgust or dislike, to disdain.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
92. punter’a-aim, n~arksmanship.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
93. pormenores-details, particulars.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
94. irrecuperables-irretrievable.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
95. lujo-luxury.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
96. coraje-anger.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
97. al galope-at a gallop.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
98. descerrajo-to discharge fire-arms.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
99. overo-
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
100. encajo-to insert, put in;to give, let go.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
101. trancó-to bar, to barricade, to close.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
102. desarmaron-disarmed him.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
103. cachivache-good-for-nothing.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
104. envainaron-to sheathe.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
105. espanto-fright.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
106. burlas-jokes, mockery.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
107. vidriera-glass window, stroe window.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
108. almacén-department store, warehouse.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
109. t’lbury-
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
110. leguas a la redonda-(idiom)
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
111. maquillar-to apply make-up.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
112. enterraron-to bury.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
113. con júbilo-(idiom) with joy, jubilation.
<dt>
B. EXERCISES
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1.b. complete the sentences with the appropriate word/s from the list at the end of this exercise.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. En la imágen de tierras de Arizona y New Mexico se encontraba _____ de Billy de Kid.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Al morir, Bill Harrigan deb’a _____ vidas; “sin contar mejicanos”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Billy the Kid nació en _____.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. Se crió entre _____.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. De ni–o perteneció a _____ “the Swamp Angels”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. A Bill Harrigan le _____ asistir a los melodramas de “cowboys”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. El _____ atra’a a los america–os de la época.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. En 1873 Billy the Kid se encuentra en una _____ bebiendo aguardiente.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. _____ a un tal El Dago.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. De esa muerte _____ Billy the Kid y murió Bill Harrigan.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. Preparaba fiestas y pagaba _____ a balazos.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. _____ le proporcionó dos balazos.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
13. Hombres _____ de leguas a la redonda.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
14. Al cuarto d’a lo enterraron _____.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
acudieron
<dt>
nació
<dt>
Nueva York
<dt>
la otra imágen
<dt>
El Dago
<dt>
la cuenta
<dt>
la pandilla
<dt>
ventiuna
<dt>
negros
<dt>
gustaba
<dt>
taberna
<dt>
oeste
<dt>
con júbilo
<dt>
El comisario Garret
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2.b. Write the infinitive of the verb which corresponds to each word and translate into English.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. aturden
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. reluciente
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. desmorronaban
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. desgarrones
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. anonadan
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. desaf’o
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. adulaciones
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. envainaron
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. acudieron
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. enterraron
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. demoledora
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. presentimiento
<dt>
3.b. Replace the words given in English for a Spanish counterpart.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. pride
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. fleeing
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. large silver coins
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. with a serpent and an eagle
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. fronteir man
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. anger
<dt>
4.b. Provide a brief comment on the following items.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Resplandor de esqueleto pelado por los pájaros.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. “sin contar mejicanos”
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Atracción del oeste
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. Enterer con júbilo
<dt>
5.b. Choose the word/s from column B opposite in meaning to each word in column A.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 1. desinteresado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 2. ilustre
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 3. resplandor
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 4. fatigado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 5. esmirriádo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 6. soez
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 7. fétido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 8. restituir
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 9. intruzo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 10. muchachuelo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 11. burlas
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 12. lujo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 13. espanto
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 14. con júbilo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
B
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a. fornido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
b. educado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
c. oscuridad
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
ch. adulaciones
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
d. fresco, listo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
e. hombre
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
f. familiar, bienvenido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
g. interesado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
h. pobreza
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
i. con pena
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
j. gracia
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
k. oloroso
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
l. malvado, común
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
m. quitar, partir
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6.b. Answer the following questions in Spanish. Use full sentences. Create a paragraph.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. ¿A qué edad muere Bill Harrigan?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. ¿Cuál era su origen étnico?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. ¿Por qué se marcha al oeste?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. ¿A dónde va?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. ¿Por qué mata a Belisario Villagrán, “el Dago”?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. ¿En qué pueblo se encuentra con el comisario Garret?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. ¿Qué reacción hubo en el pueblo luego de su muerte?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. ¿Crees que es una historia fantástica?, expande.
<dt>
V. “Nos hen dado la sierra”, by Juan Rulfo
<dt>
A. BASE VOCABULARY (in order of appearance in story).
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. rajada-(adj.) split, cracked, broken open.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. grietas-crevices, cracks, clefts.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. muy allá-(idiom)-much farther, way over there.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. ahorita (americanism) right now.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. ese alguien-(idiom) that someone.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. hace rato-(idiom) a while ago.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. neintitantos-twenty some odd.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. pu–ito a pu–ito-(idiom) handful by handful.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. desperdigando-to separate, scatter.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. platicar’a-to converse, to talk over, to discuss.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. resuello-breathing, hard breathing, panting.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. plasta-soft mass;flattned object.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
13. salivazo-portion of salivaspit at once.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
14. ¿Quién diablos?-(idiom) Who the devil.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
15. huizaches-(americanism)tree, similar to the “acacia”.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
16. trespeleques-insignificant subjects of low social class.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
17. manchita-pieces of terrain distinguisable from other due to particularities.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
18. zacate-(americanismo) del azteca “zacatl”, grass.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
19. enroscadas-(adj.) to coil, to twist.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
20. terciada (adj.) to swing over one’s shoulders.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
21. “la 30”-type of pistol.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
22. carabina-carabine, small machine gun.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
23. son otro asunto-(idiom) are another matter.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
24. tanta y tama–a tierra pare nada (sentence)-So much and such a big land for nothing.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
25. tatema-del azteca tatemar, to brown, to bake.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
26. Costra de tepetate (amer.idiom)-costra:scab, crust. tepetate:type of rock.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
27. jeta-nog’s snout, thick, heavy lips.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
28. casuarinas y paraneras-types of trees.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
29. yuntas-yokes.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
30. doter-to endow.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
31. azadón-hoe.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
32. comal-(amer.)disco de barro, en el cual se cuecen tortillas y se tuestan granos, café, ma’z, cacao.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
33.r eto–a-to sprout.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
34. zopilotes-turkey vulture.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
35. terregal (amer.)-tierra suelta, polvareda.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
36. reculando-to back up, to recoil.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
37. pepenaste (amer.) del azteca’pepena’, to collect what is on the ground.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
38. merqué-to buy
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
39. bastimento-supply, provisions.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
40. derrumbadero-crag, precipice.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
41. zangolotea-to jiggle, to flop around, to rattle.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
42. parvadas-a large amount of something.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
43. chacalacas-(amer.) del azteca-a type of loud chicken
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
44. retacha-(amer.)rebotar un cuerpo elástico.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
45. desentumecerla-to relieve of numbness.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
46. tepemezquites-especies of cactus.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
47. arriendo-return, turn back.
<dt>
B. EXERCISES
<dt>
1.c. Complete the sentences with the appropriate word/s from the list at the end of the exercise.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Después de muchas horas de caminar ___ ni semilla ni sombra.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Al final de la llanura seca ___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. A las once de la ma–ana, caminaban hombres.___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. Cuando el cuento comienza quedan ___ hombres solamente.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. Cuando cae una gota de agua, los hombres esperan que ___ más.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. El personaje nos dice que desde que era muchacho nunca vio llover en ___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. ___ se esconden en la sombra de una piedra.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. El delegado no vino a converser, vino a traer ___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. Los hombres le dicen al delegado que no han dicho nada ___, sino contra el llano.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. El gobierno quiere que los campesinos ___ semillas.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. Esteban llevaba ___ debajo de su gavan.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. Esteban llevaba su gallina para ___ y no para comersela.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
13. Cuando llegan al pueblo se oye ___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
14. Los hombres dicen que les gusta ___.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
15. La tierra que les hen dado está ___.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
llueva
<dt>
el polvo
<dt>
en contra del centro
<dt>
caminar
<dt>
siembren
<dt>
hay un pueblo
<dt>
una gallina
<dt>
ladrar a los perros
<dt>
las lagartijas
<dt>
los papeles
<dt>
cuidarla
<dt>
cuatro
<dt>
“allá arriba”
<dt>
el llano
<dt>
veintitantos
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2.c. Write the infinitive of the verb which corresponds to each word and translate into English.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. rajada
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. saborea
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. llueva
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. platicar’a
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. cayendo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. ocurre
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. probado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. resbalan
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
9. nacerá
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
10. manifiéstenlo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
11. endurecido
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
12. dado
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3.c. Structures: form sentences or phrases using the given words. Refer to the story for the correct structures.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. dado/la/nos/tierra/han
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. todav’a/muy/está/el/allá/pueblo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. somos/nudo/nosotros/que
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. gota/cae/agua/de/una
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. para/tama–a/tanta/y/nada/tierra
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. oir/nos/quiso/no
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4.c. Choose the word/s from column B opposite in meaning to each word in column A.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
A.
<dt>
<i>
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 1. allá
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 2. hace rato
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 3. cerca
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 4. lluvia
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 5. dar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 6. peligroso
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 7. a pie
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 8. tierras de riego
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 9. salir lejos
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
___ 10.seguir adelante
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a. quitar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
b. lejos
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
c. aqu’
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
ch. a caballo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
d. tierras áridas
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
e. ahorita
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
f. regresar
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
g. salir cerca
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
h. sequ’a
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
i. salvo
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5.c. Provide a brief statement on the following items.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. ni una semilla de árbol, ni una ra’z de nada.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. ¿Quién diablos har’a este llano tan grande? ¿Para qué sirve,eh?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. A mi se me ocurre que hemos caminado más de lo que llevamos andando.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. Es al latifundio que tienen que atacar, no al gobierno que les da la tierra.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. No se puede contra lo que no se puede.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6.c. Answer the following questions in Spanish,.Use full
<dt>
sentences. Create a paragraph.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. ¿Qué oyen los hombres después de muchas horas de caminar por el llano?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. ¿Qué acerca el pueblo a los hombres?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. ¿Cuantas personas hab’an comenzado el viaje?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. ¿Quer’an hablar los hombres?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. ¿Además de la carabina, ¿qué le quitaron a los campesinos?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
6. ¿Cuál es la actitud de los peones frente al delegado del gobierno?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
7. ¿En tu opinión, ¿crees que los hombres están contentos?, ¿podran sobrevivir en esas tierras?
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
8. ¿Qué crees del titulo del cuento?
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
VI. FOOTNOTES
</h2>
Franco, Jean:
<i>
An Introduction to Spanish-American Literature
</i>
. Cambridge University Press, Great Britain, 1969.
<p>
<i>
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. page 344.
<dt>
2. IBid. pg. 344.
<dt>
3. IBid. pg. 347.
<dt>
4. IBid. pg. 305.
<dt>
5. IBid. pg. 305.
<dt>
6. IBid. pg. 306.
<dt>
7. IBid. pg. 305.
<dt>
8. Rulfo, Juan:
<i>
El llano en llamas
</i>
. Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Economica,1986. pg. 12.
<dt>
9. IBid. pg. 10.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
VII. OTHER WORKS By Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</h2>
1955-
<i>
La Hojarasca
</i>
(novel). Ediciones S.L. Bogotá.
<p>
1958-
<i>
El Coronel no tiene quien le escriba
</i>
(novel).
</p>
<p>
<i>
Mito
</i>
, Num. 19 (mayo-junio), pp. 1-38.
</p>
<p>
1962-
<i>
Los Funerales de la Mamá Grande
</i>
(cuentos). Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Mexico.
</p>
<p>
1962-
<i>
La mala hora
</i>
(novel). Talleres de Gráficas Luis Pérez.,Madrid.
</p>
<p>
1967-
<i>
Cien a–os de soledad
</i>
(novel). Editorial Sudamericana, Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
1970-
<i>
Relato de un naufrago
</i>
(cuento). Tusquests, Editor, Barcelona.
</p>
<p>
1972-
<i>
La increible y triste historia de la Candida Erendira y su abuela desalmada
</i>
(cuentos). Barral Editores, Barcelona.
</p>
<p>
1974-
<i>
Cuando era feliz e indocumentado
</i>
(reportajes) Plaza &amp; Janes, Barcelona.
</p>
<p>
1975-
<i>
El oto–o del patriarca
</i>
(novel). Plaza &amp; Janes, Barcelona.
</p>
<p>
By
<i>
Jorge Luis Borges
</i>
(short Stories)
</p>
<p>
1935-
<i>
Historia Universal de la Infamia
</i>
. Colección megáfono, 3., Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
1942-
<i>
El Jard’n de los Senderos qué se Bifurcan
</i>
. Sur, EC. Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
1944-
<i>
Ficciones
</i>
, Sur, EC. Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
1949-
<i>
El Aleph
</i>
. Losada, Ed. Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
1951-
<i>
La Muerte y la Brújula
</i>
. Emecé, Buenos Aires.
</p>
<p>
By Juan Rulfo
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
1953-
<i>
El llano en llamas
</i>
(cuentos). Fondo de Cultura Económica, Mexico.
</p>
<p>
1955-
<i>
Pedro Páramo
</i>
(novel). Fondo de Cultura Económica, Mexico.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
VIII. TEACHER’S BIBLIOGRAPHY  on Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</h2>
<p>
Amorós, Andres:
<i>
Cien a–os de Soledad
</i>
, Revista de Occidente, núm.70 (enero de 1969), pp.58-62.
</p>
<p>
Benedetti, Mario: “Gabriel Garc’a Márquez o la vigilia o la vigilia dentro del sue–o”, Letras de continente mestizo (Montevideo: Collección Arca, 1967), pp. 45-154.
</p>
<p>
Campos, Jorge: “Garc’a Márquez fábula o realidad”,
<i>
Insula
</i>
(Letras de America), num, 258. pp.11-12.
</p>
<p>
Dessau, Adalbert: “El tema de la soledad en las novelas de Gabriel Garc’a Márquez”, El ensayo y la cr’tica literaria en Iberoamerica (Toronto: Universidad de Toronto, 1970), pp. 209-214.
</p>
<p>
Domingo, José: “Gabriel Garc’a Márquez”,
<i>
Insula
</i>
, Núm. 259, pp.6-8.
</p>
<p>
Franco, Jean: “El mundo grotesco de Garc’a Márquez”,
<i>
Indice
</i>
, Num. 24 (1968), pp37.
</p>
<p>
Fuentes, Carlos:-Garc’a Márquez: la segunda lectura”, La nueva novela Hispanoamericana (México: Cuadernos de Joaqu’n Mort’z, 1969), pp.58-67.
</p>
<p>
Giacoman, Helmy F. (ED) “Homenaje a Gabriel Garc’a Márquez”, New York: Las Americas Publishing Co., 1972.
</p>
<p>
Gullón, Ricardo: “Garc’a Márquez o el olvidado arte de contar”,
<i>
Asomante, Num. 3
</i>
. (1969), pp.7-17. (como libro: Madrid: Taurus Ediciones, S.A., 1970).
</p>
<p>
Maddocks, Melvin: “One Hundred Years of Solitude”,
<i>
LIFE
</i>
(book review), June 5. 1970, p.12.
</p>
<p>
Oviedo, José Miguel: “Macondo: un territorrio mágico y americano”,
<i>
Asedios a Garc’a Márquez
</i>
, (Santiago:Ed. Universitaria, 1971), pp. 89-105.
</p>
<p>
Rama, Angel: “Una novela de la violencia americana”,
<i>
Asedios a Garc’a Márquez
</i>
, (Santiago: Ed. Universitaria, 1971), pp.106-125.
</p>
<p>
Rodr’guez-Monegal, Emir:
<i>
Narradores de esta America
</i>
, Montevideo: Ed. Alfa, 1969). La haza–a de un escritor”,
<i>
Visión
</i>
(18 de julio de 1969), pp.27-31.
</p>
<p>
Urondo, Francisco: “La buena hora de Garc’a Márquez:
<i>
Cuadernos Hispanoamerica–os
</i>
(Madrid), num. 232 (abril de 1969), pp. 163-168.
</p>
<p>
Wolff, Gregory: “The Fable Made Flesh”,
<i>
Newsweek
</i>
(books), March 2, 1970, pp. 88-89.
</p>
<p>
Zavala, Iris M: “Cien a–os de soledad, Crónica de Indias”,
<i>
Insula
</i>
(Madrid), tomo xxv. num.286 septiembre de 1970), pp.3-11.
</p>
<p>
<i>
On Jorge Luis Borges
</i>
</p>
<p>
Alazraki, Jaime: “Jorge Luis Borges”, New York: Columbia University Press, 1969.
</p>
<p>
Barrenechea, Ana Mar’a: “Borges the Labyrinth Maker”, Ed. and Trans. Robert Lima, New York: New York University Press, 1965.
</p>
<p>
Christ, Ronald J: “The Art of Fictions Jorge Luis Borges”.
<i>
Paris Review
</i>
<i>
40
</i>
(Winter-Spring 1967), pp.116-64.
</p>
<p>
Costa, Rene de: “A Note on Narrative voice in Borge’s Early Fiction”.
<i>
Modern Philology
</i>
76 (1978), pp. 193-96.
</p>
<p>
Dunham, Lowell and Ivar Ivask, Eds: “The Cardinal points of Borges”, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971.
</p>
<p>
Engu’danos, Miguel: “Imagination and escape in the Short Stories of Jorge Luis Borges.”
<i>
Texas Quarterly 4
</i>
(Winter 1961):118-27.
</p>
<p>
Flores, Angel: “Magical Realism in Spanish American Fiction”,
<i>
Hispania
</i>
38 (May 1955):187-92.
</p>
<p>
Kerrigan, Anthony: “Introduction to
<i>
Ficciones
</i>
.”, Ed. A. Kerrigan, New York: Grove Press, Inc., 1962.
</p>
<p>
Levine, Suzanne Jill:”A Universal Tradition: The Fictional Biography.”
<i>
Review No.8
</i>
(1973):24-28.
</p>
<p>
McBride, Mary: “Jorge Luis Borges, Existentialist: The Aleph and the Relativity of Human Perception.”
<i>
Studies in Short Fiction 14
</i>
(1977), 401-03.
</p>
<p>
Rodrigues-Monegal, Emir: “Jorge Luis Borges: A Literary Biography.” New York:E.P. Dutton &amp; Co., Inc., 1978.
</p>
<p>
Shaw, Donald L: “Borges:
<i>
Ficciones
</i>
.” London: Grant and Cutler, 1976.
</p>
<p>
<i>
On Juan Rulfo
</i>
</p>
<p>
Anderson Imbert, Enrique:
<i>
Historia de la literature hispanoamericana
</i>
, Fondo de Cultura Económica, Mexico, 1957.
</p>
<p>
Fernández Moreno, César (coordinator):
<i>
América Latina en su literature
</i>
, Mexico: Siglo XXI, 1972, pgs., 199-200, 233.
</p>
<p>
Franco Jean:
<i>
Spanish American Literature Since Independence
</i>
. London: Benn, 1973, pas. 246-252.
</p>
<p>
Gnutzmann, Rita: “Perspectives narratives de
<i>
El llano en llamas
</i>
, de Juan Rulfo”,
<i>
Anales de literature
</i>
<i>
hispanoamericana
</i>
(1972), 321-336.
</p>
<p>
Leal, Luis:
<i>
Breve historia del cuento mexicano
</i>
, Ediciones de Andrea, Mexico, 1956.
</p>
<p>
Luraschi, Ilse: “Some Stylistic Devices in the Works of Juan Rulfo”, University of Pittsbugh (thesis), 1972.
</p>
<p>
Rodr’guez Alcalá, Hugo:
<i>
El arte de Juan Rulfo
</i>
, Ediciones de Bellas Artes, Mexico, 1965.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
BIBLIOGRAPHY
</h2>
Borges, Jorge Luis:
<i>
Historia universal de la infamia
</i>
, Alianza Editorial, S.A., Madrid, 1971; Emece Editores, S.A., Buenos Aires, 1954.
<p>
de Garayalde, Giovanna:
<i>
Jorge Luis Borges: Sources and Illumination
</i>
, The Octagon Press, London, 1978.
</p>
<p>
———.
<i>
Diccionario Manual Ilustrado de la Lengua Espanola
</i>
, VOX, Bibliograf, S.A., Barcelona, 1954; 3rd Edition, 1972; Revisión y Prólogo por D. Samuel Gili Gaya.
</p>
<p>
Franco, Jean:
<i>
An Introduction to Spanish-American Literature
</i>
, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1969.
</p>
<p>
Garc’a Márquez, Gabriel:
<i>
Los funerales de la Mamá Grande
</i>
, Editorial Sudamericana, Buenos Aires, 1982.
</p>
<p>
Gordon, Donald K.:
<i>
Los cuentos de Juan Rulfo
</i>
, Colección Nova Scholar, Playor, S.A., Madrid, 1976.
</p>
<p>
Neves, Alfredo N.:
<i>
Diccionario de Americanismos
</i>
, Editorial Sopena Argentina, S.A., Buenos Aires, 1973.
</p>
<p>
———.
<i>
Recopilación de textos sobre Gabriel Garc’a Márquez
</i>
, Serie Valoración Múltiple, Centro de Investigaciones Literarias, Casa de las Americas, La Habana, Cuba.
</p>
<p>
———.
<i>
Recopilación de textos sobre Juan Rulfo
</i>
, Serie Valoración Múltiple, Centro de Investigaciones Literarias, Casa de las Americas, La Habana, Cuba.
</p>
<p>
Rulfo, Juan:
<i>
El llano en llamas
</i>
, Colección Popular, Fondo de Cultura Económica, Mexico, 1953, 1986.
</p>
<p>
Sommers, Joseph:
<i>
La narrativa de Juan Rulfo: Interpretaciones cr’ticas
</i>
, Secretar’a de Educación Pública, Sep/Setentas, Mexico, 1974.
</p>
<p>
Velázquez:
<i>
A New Pronouncing Dictionary of the Spanish and English Languages
</i>
, Wilcox and Follett Company, Chicago, New York, 1943.
</p>
</body>