---
layout: "unit"
title: "87.06.05: “A Stitch in Time”"
path: "/curriculum/units/1987/6/87.06.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "“A Stitch in Time”"
unitAuthor: "Pamela M. Fowler"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 87.06.05:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Narrative
</li>
<li>
Phase I: Introduction
</li>
<li>
Phase II: The History of Weaving, Looms and Handlooms
</li>
<li>
Phase III: Weaving-Hands on Experience
</li>
<li>
Phase IV
</li>
<li>
Phase V
</li>
<li>
Where to Find Readings
</li>
<li>
Bibliography For Teachers
</li>
<li>
For Students
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/1987/6/87.06.05.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<blockquote>
<font size="-1">
Man began weaving as early as the Stone Age. He learned to make rough clothing from the filters of the flax plant. By the time of the Ancient Egyptians, making linen was a fine art. The discovery of how to unwind the thread of the silkworm cocoons and weave them into cloth was made around 2000 B.C. by the Chinese. About the same time the people of India found out how to make cloth from the fibers of the cotton plants.
<p>
It wasn’t until the middle Ages and Renaissance Period that people began to weave cloth and clothing for their families in their homes on handlooms they made.
</p>
<p>
Although Indian rugs and blankets are still woven by hand, today most woven cloth is done by automatic looms run by man.
</p>
</font>
</blockquote>
How cloth is woven into fabric is still pretty much a mystery to may students. If one is not an avid seamstress the question remains dormant in the brain. Through “A Stitch in Time” I intend to challenge my students intellectually and creatively.
<p>
Continuing from a previously written unit “A Stitch in Time” entails the explanation of the various tools to change thread into cloth. This unit is divided into five phases.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Phase I: Introduction
</h2>
During this phase of “A Stitch in Time” I will introduce the basic information that each student will need to now prior to beginning the class.
<p>
Daily Progress Report Sheet: The Progress Report Sheet is kept on a daily basis by the teacher. The report sheet lists ten (10) positive and appropriate behaviors for the school and classroom. These behaviors entail punctuality, completion of classwork, being prepared for class, cooperation and participation during class.
</p>
<p>
For younger students the teacher may wish to make two copies of the report sheet and send one home for the parents. The second one the teacher keeps in a folder for documentation purposes. As for the older student the re port sheet is primarily for documentation purposes.
</p>
<p>
Requirements and Materials: Beginning from the first day of class a individual folder is kept for each student. One shelf on the bookcase or a separate space on a table or file cabinet is cleared solely for storage of the file folders.
</p>
<p>
Each day the student comes into class, they take their folder from the file, set it on the desk and review the corrected papers inside.
</p>
<p>
In addition to the assignments, the folder includes a daily overview of the class procedure. The overview sheet states a before class assignment which each student must complete. This allows the teacher five minutes to regroup and prepare materials for this class.
</p>
<p>
A suggested outline and ex planation of the class overview is written on the following pages.
</p>
<p>
Section I of the class review reminds the student to hand in the homework assignment from the night before. Section II states a five to ten minute before class assignment. This assignment may vary anywhere from a simple handwriting exercise to completing an unfinished assignment Tom a previous class to beginning a special research paper. Section III informs the class of what will be discussed in the remainder of the class time. Normally the class lesson begins with a discussion or introduction (A) of a new unit followed by a group assignment ( B). After which the teacher reinforces all skills learned before a in class independent assignment ( C) is given.
</p>
<p>
Homework is a vital part of the learning process and one assignment is given nightly. The assignment is listed in Section IV of the class overview. The following two sections are given per the teacher’s discretion. The Special Assignment V deals with research papers, field trips, guest speakers or videos to be shown. Section VI Test Notes alerts each student to upcoming tests. Again tests are given par discretion of the teacher, but I suggest at the close of each unit and sub unit as well as at the end of the year.
</p>
<p>
The final papers to be included in the file folder have to do directly with the final project. As a teacher’s aid, the 5“ x 8“ index file of all projects is created and kept for reference. As projects are introduced and directions are explained each student is responsible for obtaining a xerox copy of each project and keeping it in their folder. Upon completion of the course, the various pages will be bound together to create a file for each student to keep.
</p>
<p>
To assist each student keep all notes and outlines well organized, a composition tablet is distributed at the beginning of the course.
</p>
<p>
To begin on the right foot, I prefer to teach my students the basics of outlining and organization.
</p>
<p>
Overview/Syllabus: Each student is furnished with an overview and syllabus of the course. The overview describes what “A Stitch in Time“ entails and what the objectives are as well as the major goals of the course. The syllabus lists the major unit titles to be taught an the dates that they are to begin. This method assists the teacher as well as the students become prepared for the class. The use of the syllabus is focused toward the older high school student.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Phase II: The History of Weaving, Looms and Handlooms
</h2>
Phase II focuses on introducing the students to the various spinning wheels and looms created and used. They range from the Spinning Jenny to the Automatic Loom. During Phase II the majority of the learning is done by visiting museums, viewing films, doing research materials, visits to and interacting with a variety of speakers who show expertise in the area of weaving and spinning cotton into thread.
<p>
Each subunit is conducted in a similar manner.
</p>
<p>
A. Reading for Information: Each sub unit is accompanied by several short readings to supply the class with in formation. The information is read in class and discussed, or the teacher may opt to lecture the class on the topic and assign the reading for homework with questions to accompany the reading.
</p>
<p>
B. Reading for fact: Using the reading Tom section A give the students work sheets that require them to re-read the information sheet for information on important facts.
</p>
<p>
C. Relating the information and facts to those already known: Using the resources around and in the city relate each fact learned to a physical object the students then will be able to better understand the lesson.
</p>
<p>
D. Recall of Information: Recalling information simply informs the teacher of those students who have taken in the information supplied. In dealing with cotton the facts have to be related to a physical object that the student can see and or touch. More specifically clothing.
</p>
<p>
In order for the teacher to learn what each student is able to recall, one manner is testing, quizzing, and simple reports or discussions where the teacher asks the questions and the students respond. Other ways are as follows:
</p>
<p>
Art Projects, Role Playing, Peer Quizzing, Research Papers, Book Reports, Field Trips and reports on the findings, Oral Reports, Simulated Commercials, Fashion Designing and videos.
</p>
<p>
Objective: To demonstrate methods used for converting thread or yarn into cloth.
</p>
<p>
Strategy: Using Articles and field trips in the following lessons on Weaving Machinery.
</p>
<p>
**Note: Suggested readings can be found following the conclusion of this curriculum unit writing.
</p>
<h3>
Class Overview
</h3>
Welcome to “A Stitch in Time.” In this class you will learn how weaving began, why and by whom. Most of all, if you have every wondered how cloth gets woven and why there are so many different types of material you will learn that also. Another part of the class will be to do a lot of hands on work. By that I mean weaving projects.
<p>
You will be required to read, write and participate in class as part of your grading. Included in the requirements you will learn and complete eight weaving projects and a wall hanging. Carefully review the tentative schedule for class listed below.
</p>
<p>
19ÐÐ - 19ÐÐ Syllabus
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
Day
</td>
<td>
Week and Lesson
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
Week 1
</td>
<td>
Quarter One
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<i>
1
</i>
</td>
<td>
Introduction to class, take roll, requirements, policies, distribution of folders, syllabus, daily overview, grade reports, homework, materials.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
2
</td>
<td>
Distribution of composition books, introduce outline and notetaking process. Introduce: How Cotton is Picked
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
3
</td>
<td>
Continue—Read for Information
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
4
</td>
<td>
Continue—Read for Facts
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
5
</td>
<td>
Continue—Video/film
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<h3>
Lesson 2-1
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Diagram Handloom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
The Handloom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Assignment:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Read the article on handlooms and write a short essay.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<dt>
B. Basic Design of handloom 1. Stationary parts 2. Moving parts a. heralds b. upper shafts c. treadles d. shuttle e. reed f. batten
<dt>
C. How the loom is operated 1. Jay Kay 1733 2. Sequence of weaving on handloom
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<h3>
Lesson 2-2
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Blank diagram of handloom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Drawloom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<p>
A. Introduction 1. Why the new invention?
</p>
<p>
B. New Attachments 1. Iingoe 2. cumberboard
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 2-3
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Diagram of Jacquard Machine
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Jacquard Machine
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<p>
A. Introduction
</p>
<p>
B. Why the new machine is so important 1. Basile Bouchan 2. M. Falcon 3. Jacques de Vaucanson
</p>
<p>
C. Parts of the new machine  1. hooks  2. griff  3. cylinder  4. needle  5. bottom board  6. neck cord  7. mounting thread  8. comberboard  9. mail 10. Iingoe
</p>
<p>
D. How the machine is operated 1. Weaving on the Jacquard Machine 2. Step by step instructions
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 2-4
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Diagram of all looms, Lessons 2-1, 2-2, 2-3
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Power Loom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline:
</i>
</p>
<p>
I. Introduction 1. History 2. M. de Gennes 3. Dr. Edmund Cartwright
</p>
<p>
A. Difficulties with the Power loom
</p>
<p>
B. Improvements made on the loom
</p>
<p>
C. Motion/Working parts 1. warp beam 2. slay 3. reed 4. tappets 5. crank shaft
</p>
<p>
D. Picking Parts 1. picker 2. shuttle box 3. slay
</p>
<p>
E. Dobby Shedding Motion 1. Dobbies 2. squire diggle 3. Charles Parkers
</p>
<p>
F. Warp Stop Motions
</p>
<p>
II. Introduction 1. Warp 2. Weft
</p>
<p>
A. Preparing Warp and Weft for Weaving 1. William Radcliffe 2. Treatment
</p>
<p>
B. Winding Procedures 1. pirn 2. bobbin
</p>
<p>
C. Parts 1. spindle 2. drum 3. thread guide 4. shaper 5. driving band
</p>
<p>
D. Warping 1. mill 2. beam 3. sectional
</p>
<p>
E. Dressing the loom 1. yorkshire 2. scotch
</p>
<p>
F. Hand sizing
</p>
<p>
G. Drawing-in (entering)
</p>
<p>
H. Twisting
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 2-8
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Diagrams of smallware loom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Smallware Loom
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<p>
A. Introduction
</p>
<p>
B. Frame and Build
</p>
<p>
C. Patent
</p>
<p>
D. Swivel Weaving
</p>
<p>
E. Pile Weaving 1. double pile 2. single pile
</p>
<p>
F. Terry Looms
</p>
<p>
G. Gauge Textures
</p>
<p>
H. Lappet Looms
</p>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To demonstrate methods used for converting fibers into thread or yard. (spinning)
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Through the use of written articles and field trips will explain to the students the use and invention of the spinning wheel and its components.
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 2-7
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Overheads, films and diagrams of the spinning Wheel.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Spinning wheel.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<p>
A. Introduction 1. Why invent the spinning wheel? 2. Use and convenience of the spinning wheel.
</p>
<p>
B. Parts and implements of the spinning wheel. 1. Spindles past and present 2. Bobbing Wheel a. Lewis Paul
</p>
<p>
3. foot pedal
</p>
<p>
C. Modern Changes of the Wheel 1. Mechanical means 2. automatic methods 3. speed
</p>
<p>
D. Operation of the spinning wheel
</p>
<p>
E. The Spinning Jenny
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Phase III: Weaving-Hands on Experience
</h2>
At this point in the unit the students have the opportunity to experience the fine art of weaving thread into cloth and material. To begin, the three basic weave styles are introduced followed by and exposure to the vocabulary used by expert weavers.
<h3>
Objective:
</h3>
To instill in the students the vocabulary of expert weavers.
<h3>
Strategy:
</h3>
The vocabulary is learned by watching the weaver, the teacher, work on a loom and listening to what he/she is saying as the instructions are spoken and the vocabulary is defined.
<h3>
Lesson 3-1
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
List of the following vocabulary, dictionary, encyclopedia handmade loom, blank diagrams of looms learned, and yarn
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Weaver’s vocabulary
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline:
</i>
</p>
<p>
I. Introduction of Vocabulary 1. woof 2. weft 3. warp 4. shuttle 5. dress (the loom) 6. beater
</p>
<p>
A. Definition of vocabulary 1. Using handloom teacher dress the loom, introduce warp 2. weave the woof/weft 3. introduce the shuttle 4. weave the weft/woof 5. uses the beater
</p>
<p>
B. Label the appropriate parts of 1. Hand loom 2. Powerloom
</p>
<p>
C. Homework 1. Materials for handloom project a. shoebox top b. paper clips c. pencil d. ruler e. yarn
</p>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To know how to create and use two simple looms from household materials. To demonstrate the three basic weaves and patterns for weaving.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Using the following materials, each student will make two simple looms and use them for future projects.
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 3-2
</h3>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
1.
</td>
<td>
Cardboard Handloom
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
2.
</td>
<td>
Shoebox loom
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
3.
</td>
<td>
Three basic weaves
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
Plain Cloth
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
thickness
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
weave style
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
cloot
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iv.
</td>
<td>
applications
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
v.
</td>
<td>
uses
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
b.
</td>
<td>
Twills
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
use
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
formation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
weave style
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iv.
</td>
<td>
simple vs. fancy
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
c.
</td>
<td>
Satins-Sateens
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
bulk
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
appearance
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
feel
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iv.
</td>
<td>
difference (from twills)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
v.
</td>
<td>
weave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
B.
</td>
<td>
Backed and Reversibles
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
Compound
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
material
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
design and coloring
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
weave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iv.
</td>
<td>
difference
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
C.
</td>
<td>
Piled Fabrics
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
chenille
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
operation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
thread s
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
intention-carpets
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
b.
</td>
<td>
Velvets and Plushes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
weave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
cuts
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
coloring
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
D.
</td>
<td>
Cross Weaves
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
Plain gauze
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
twisting
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
weave operation
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
b.
</td>
<td>
Leno-muslin
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
number of picks
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
texture
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
c.
</td>
<td>
Fancy gauze
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
i.
</td>
<td>
crossing threads
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
ii.
</td>
<td>
twisting threads
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
iii.
</td>
<td>
combining
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
E.
</td>
<td>
Shoebox Loom
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
construction
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
b.
</td>
<td>
dress
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
c.
</td>
<td>
weave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
F.
</td>
<td>
Cardboard Loom
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
a.
</td>
<td>
construction
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
b.
</td>
<td>
dress
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
c.
</td>
<td>
weave
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
To Make a Simple Loom
<p>
<i>
Materials
</i>
</p>
<p>
shoebox top
</p>
<p>
paper clips
</p>
<p>
yarn
</p>
<p>
blunt-end needle
</p>
<p>
popsicle stick
</p>
<p>
hammer
</p>
<p>
small nail
</p>
<p>
<i>
Directions
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Tightly fasten a row of paperclips on the two opposite narrow ends of the shoebox top. Make sure the clips touch each other.
<dt>
2. On the bottom inside of the box top label each clip Tom left to right, beginning with the numeral zero (0).
<dt>
3. Do the same to the opposite side.
<i>
DO NOT
</i>
turn the box top around. Label each clip so that both sides coordinate.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Dressing the Loom
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Tie the end of the yarn to one paperclip at the end of the row which begins with the numeral zero (0).
<dt>
2. Wind the yarn around the paperclip Which is directly across Tom the one you began with.
<dt>
3. Return to the side in which that yarn was tied and wind the yarn around the paperclip labeled (1).
<dt>
4. Go back to the opposite side and wind the yarn around the coordinating clip.
<dt>
5. Continue to wind the yarn back and forth Tom one side to the other going around the paperclips. (A)
<dt>
6. At the end tie the yarn to the last clip in the same manner that the first clip
<dt>
7. Measure the remaining yarn to three feet, then cut it at the end
<dt>
8. Prepare the shuttle by threading the longer piece of yarn attached to the
<dt>
9. If you choose to use a popsicle stick, puncture a hole in the end of the stick.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Cardboard Loom
</i>
</p>
<p>
(figure available in print form)
</p>
<p>
<i>
Materials
</i>
</p>
<p>
1-8 1/2“ x 11“ piece of cardboard
</p>
<p>
ruler
</p>
<p>
scissors and/or razor
</p>
<p>
<i>
Directions
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. One half inch from the top and bottom of cardboard draw a straight line from one end to the other.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
<dt>
2. Place the ruler along the edge and mark every 1/4“.
<dt>
3. Use the ruler and draw slanted lines from the 1/4“ mark to the edge of the cardboard.
<dt>
4. With the razor, cut along the lines stopping at the straight edge.
<dt>
5. Thread the shuttle and set it aside.
<dt>
6. Label each point on the cardboard in the same manner that is described in the simple loom directions.
<dt>
7. Follow the a same instructions for dressing the loom omitting steps six (6) nine (9).
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To be able to recognize basic weaves and patterns in every day materials.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Each member of the class will Choose a piece of clothing and identify it in accordance to the weaves and patterns they have learned.
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 3-3
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Assorted worksheets of patterns and swatches of material. Clothing articles.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Three basic weaves and weave patterns
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<dt>
1. Review of weaves
<dt>
2. Review of patterns
<dt>
B. Weaves
<dt>
1. Comparison
<dt>
2. Contrast
<dt>
C. Patterns
<dt>
1. Comparison
<dt>
2. Contrast
<dt>
D. Identification
<dt>
1. Swatches
<dt>
2. Clothing
<dt>
E. Homework
<dt>
Design an article of clothing or a set that would use two of the patterns and weaves learned.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To be able to follow written instructions for weaving projects.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Ss will A) watch the teacher as he/ she works through the weaving project on a handmade loom and B) work along with the teacher on their homemade looms and C) follow directions written on paper. (The projects may later be taken Tom art books.)
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 3-4
</h3>
Project to follow lesson outline.
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Written instructions, looms, yarn.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Following instructions and the importance of . . .
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<dt>
B. Teacher Demonstration
<dt>
C. Teacher Instruction
<dt>
1. Read the instruction out loud
<dt>
2. Weave on the loom as instructions read.
<dt>
D. Students Activity
<dt>
1. Silently read the instructions
<dt>
2. Weaves as instructed.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Making a scent cushion
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Choose the colors
<dt>
2. Dress the loom and thread the shuttle (to dress the loom see lesson 3-3).
<dt>
3. Beginning on the right side of the loom, take the shuttle and beg in weaving under the first piece of warp then over the second.
<dt>
4. Continue under one over one until you have come to the end of the first row.
<dt>
5. Turn the loom around and begin the second row going Tom right to left.
<dt>
6. Use the basket weave for the second row: Take the shuttle under the first warp then go over the next two warps.
<dt>
7. Continue under one and over two to the end of the row.
<dt>
8. To beg in the third row, turn the loom around again so that you will always work Tom right to left.
<dt>
9. Repeat step numbers 3-8 until the cloth is five inches (5“) long.
<dt>
10. Carefully remove the cloth from the loom by using a popsicle stick to push one side of the cloth to the top of the pins. Turn and duplicate the process on the other side. Place the cloth aside.
<dt>
11. Dress the loom again and repeat steps 1-9 for the second piece of the cushion.
<dt>
12. Carefully remove the cloth Tom the loom when this piece is five inches long.
<dt>
13. Place the two
<i>
right
</i>
sides of the cloth together. (That is the two sides of the cloth that you want on the
<i>
outside
</i>
of your cushion.)
<dt>
14. Handstitch three sides together. REMEMBER Leave one side open.
<dt>
15. Carefully turn the cushion inside out so that the right sides are now on the outside of the cushion.
<dt>
16. Stuff the cushion with any of the following items:
<dt>
a. pine needles
<dt>
b. cotton balls and herbs (Tom the kitchen)
<dt>
c. nylon stockings and herbs (from the kitchen)
<dt>
d. cotton balls sprinkled with perfume
<dt>
e. nylon stockings sprinkled with perfume
<dt>
17. Hand stitch the open side closed with small hem stitches.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To make a simple weaving square and to dress the square.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
The weaving square can either be bought Tom a hobby store in a kit or made by hand with materials found in the Industrial Arts Department in school. Once the loom is made the teacher can slowly take the class step by step through dressing the weaving square.
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 3-5
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Materials for the weaving square, directions for the weaving square.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Construction and use of weaving square
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<dt>
B. Weaving Square
<dt>
1. Construction
<dt>
2. Dress
<dt>
3. Weave
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Making a Weaving Square
</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Materials:
</i>
</p>
<p>
1-8 inch square Tame
</p>
<p>
(can be larger)
</p>
<p>
small pins
</p>
<p>
hammer
</p>
<p>
long blunt end needle
</p>
<p>
black felt tip pen-fine point
</p>
<p>
ruler
</p>
<p>
yarn
</p>
<p>
<i>
Directions:
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Using the pattern, mark the frame with felt tip pen. Mark all points, arrows, and numbers. On the side mark each side A,B,C. or D.
<dt>
2. Hammer in pins on each point marked
<dt>
3. Lay ruler on top of the pins and even them out.
<dt>
4. Dress the square
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Dressing the Weaving Square
</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Layer One
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Holding the loom with the numeral one (1) in front of you (the arrow should be pointing away from you), label the square as follows:
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
<dt>
2. Hold the end of the yarn in your left hand.
<dt>
3. Beg inning at the numeral one (1) pull the yarn on the inside of the pins along side C.
<dt>
4. Wind the yarn around the first two pins on side B.
<dt>
5. Return the yarn to Side A.
<dt>
6. Go in between the second and third pins of side A then tie the yarn into a knot.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
(figure available in print form)
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
7. Pull the yarn to the right and wind it around the following two pins on side A
<dt>
8. Bring the yarn to side B going to the right between the third and fourth pins.
<dt>
9. Return the yarn to side A going between the third and fourth pins.
<dt>
10. Continue this sequence Tom side A to B to A until you reach the curved arrow marked numeral two (2).
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Layer Two
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Now turn the loom so that side D is facing you.
<dt>
2. Wind the yarn around the first two pins on side D.
<dt>
3. Return the yarn to side C.
<dt>
4. Go between the first and second pins and wind the yarn around the second and third pins.
<dt>
5. Return the yarn back to side D.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
<dt>
6. Continue this sequence from side D to side C to D until you come to the end of the row marked with the numeral three (3) and the arrow.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Layer three
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Return the Tame to the initial position with side A facing you.
<dt>
2. Pull the yarn around the last pin in side C and around the fir st pin of side B.
<dt>
3. Pull the yarn between the two pins on the end of side B by the number
<dt>
4. Bring the yarn toward you to side A.
<dt>
5. Bring the yarn between the first and second pins.
<dt>
6. Wind the yarn around the next two pins.
<dt>
7. Go between the third and fourth pins and return the yard to side B.
<dt>
8. Wind the yarn around the third and fourth pins of side B and return to side A.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
<dt>
9. Continue this sequence to the end of the row.
<dt>
10. Wind the yarn LOOSELY around the outside of the pins about four and one-half times.
<dt>
(figure available in print form)
<dt>
11. Cut the yarn.
<dt>
12. Unwind the yarn Tom the outside of the pins and thread the shuttle with the free end of the yarn.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
To Weave on the weaving square
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Beg in at the numeral two (2) from side D (on the right) to side C (on the left).
<dt>
2. Start Tom the first and second pins on side D.
<dt>
3. Go over the first thread, under the second, over and under to the end of the row pulling the yarn all the way through.
<dt>
4. Turn the square so you are able to weave back.
<dt>
5. Go between the two pins and repeat steps three and four.
<dt>
6. Use your beater to keep pushing the woof threads tightly against each other.
<dt>
7. At times you may need to poke and prod the yarn in both directions to keep the weave even.
<dt>
8. Do NOT pull the woof too tightly as you weave. If you do you will end up with a woven piece narrower in the center than at the ends.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
**IDEA** Try using multi-colored yarn.
<p>
**IDEA** Try dressing the loom with one color and weave with another.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To encourage creativity in the students use of looms.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
See following projects.
</p>
<h3>
<i>
PROJECT IDEAS
</i>
</h3>
eye glass case 3-4“ squares
<p>
patchwork pillow cover 12“x12“, 9-4“ squares ( different weaves and colors)
</p>
<p>
coaster 4“x4”, 1 -4“ square
</p>
<p>
doll blanket 12“x16“, 12-4” squares
</p>
<p>
scarf 8“x72“, 12-8“ squares (or more if desired)
</p>
<p>
quilt 80”;80“, 20-8“squares
</p>
<p>
**IDEA** Decorate each project with embroidery stitches
</p>
<p>
<i>
Directions for all projects above
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Weave the number of squares you need on the loom.
<dt>
2. Carefully remove the square from the loom and place it in a safe place as you weave the rest of the squares.
<dt>
3. Once the number of squares you need are complete, one place the RlGHT sides of the first two squares together.
<dt>
4. Hand sew the two.
<dt>
5. To attach the rest of the squares remember to always have the right sides of the material together.
<dt>
6. Hand sew each piece until the final project is complete.
<dt>
7. Lay your completed work on a flat CLEAN surface and hand press the cloth.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Phase IV
</h2>
<h3>
Objective:
</h3>
To encourage creativity in the students by using assorted materials and means.
<h3>
Strategy:
</h3>
Allow each student the art of weaving without the loom, but with strips of folded cloth and/ or ribbon.
<h3>
Lesson 4-1
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Appropriate materials for projects
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Individual weaving without a loom.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
A. Introduction
<dt>
1. Why weave without a loom?
<dt>
2. How to do it
<dt>
B. Hand on work
<dt>
1. Class project
<dt>
a. pillow
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
Materials
</i>
</p>
<p>
12”x12“ square pillow covered with cloth or fabric
</p>
<p>
8 2/3 yard 1/2“ wide ribbon (matching)-cut into 24-13“ long strips
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
needle
</td>
<td>
pins (preferably with colored heads)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
thread
</td>
<td>
iron
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
scissors
</td>
<td>
flat surface
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<i>
Directions
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Out 2” strips.
<dt>
2. Fold the strips in half down the center.
<dt>
3. Press with an iron.
<dt>
4. Open
<dt>
5. Fold the outside edges toward the center press.
<dt>
6. Fold the strips down the center again and press.
<dt>
7. Leaving 1/2“ on both sides, place the ribbon on the pillow to create the warp. Leave 1/2“ space in between each ribbon strip.
<dt>
8. Pin each end to the pillow.
<dt>
9. Fold under the 1/2” on each side.
<dt>
10. Hand sew the edges to the pillow near the seam with small hemming stitches.
<dt>
11. Using fingers, weave the woof using the twelve pieces.
<dt>
12. Begin under then over the warp.
<dt>
13. Leave 1/2“ space in between each piece.
<dt>
14. Pin in place.
<dt>
15. Fold under the 1/2“ edge on each end.
<dt>
16. Hand sew with small hemming stitches.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
**IDEA** Use 13 yards instead of 8 2/3. Weave the woof so that no fabric shows through.
<p>
**IDEA** Use 17 1/4 yards of ribbon and arrange it so the warp has no spaces.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Objective:
</i>
</p>
<p>
To stimulate variations in the weaving pattern.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Strategy:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Alternative are methods that each weaver can use to enhance the project and make it an original.
</p>
<h3>
Lesson 4-2
</h3>
<p>
<i>
Preparation:
</i>
</p>
<p>
List of alternative ideas
</p>
<p>
<i>
Discussion Topic:
</i>
</p>
<p>
Alternatives
</p>
<p>
<i>
Topic Outline
</i>
</p>
<p>
Using the weaving square weave project(s) using all seven alternatives
</p>
<p>
To create own alternative ideas.
</p>
<p>
<i>
ALTERNATIVES
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Stop part way across
<dt>
2. Use different textures of yarn.
<dt>
3. Weave in twigs, feathers, grass, and other natural decorations.
<dt>
4. Use berries.
<dt>
5. Use string and wire to weave.
<dt>
6. String beads.
<dt>
7. Use buttons.
<dt>
8. Use macaroni, or pieces of old broken jewelry, or the earring that has no mate.
<dt>
9. Alternate pattern by going under 2 over 1, under 1 over 3, etc.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Phase V
</h2>
<h3>
Objective:
</h3>
To demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the weaving process.
<h3>
Strategy:
</h3>
As the finale of “A Stitch in Time“ each student will demonstrate their understanding of the weaving process by creating and completing a wall hanging (tapestry) of their own choice.
<h3>
Lesson 5-1
</h3>
To Create a Wall Hanging
<p>
<i>
Materials
</i>
</p>
<p>
1 -16”x48“ smooth piece of wood
</p>
<p>
nails
</p>
<p>
hammer
</p>
<p>
string-firmly twisted (twine or wire is best)
</p>
<p>
yarn
</p>
<p>
assorted materials as desired
</p>
<p>
picture hangers
</p>
<p>
<i>
Instructions
</i>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Paint wood as desire using:
<dt>
a. oil finish or varnish
<dt>
b. glue on fabric
<dt>
c. Ieave natural
<dt>
d. shellac
<dt>
2. Lightly sketch a line 1 “ away from the edge on the two 1 6“ sides first, the on the other sides.
<dt>
3. Hammer in the nails on the lines approximately one-eighth of an inch apart.
<dt>
4. Dress the loom with firmly twisted string (see lesson 3-5)
<dt>
5. Begin to weave.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<i>
To End the Tapestry
</i>
</p>
<p>
Tie the ends of string to the last two nails.
</p>
<p>
<i>
To Hang the Tapestry
</i>
</p>
<p>
Nail in one picture hanger on the left upper corner of the tapestry and one on the upper right corner. Display the Tapestry.
</p>
<h3>
Supplemental Activities for Phase II
</h3>
The following activities can be used by the teacher to enhance and reinforce the learning process.
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Videos and films
<dt>
Winchester (Wexler) School
<dt>
Dixwell Avenue
<dt>
New Haven, CT 06519
<dt>
(behind the Q-House)
<dt>
2. Library Research is defined as searching through the library card catalog and listing books that are available and which pertain to the discussion topic. After a book is found the student A. copies down the title, author and catalog number (or Dewy Decimal System). B. Iocates the book and C. skims through it in order to identify whether the book is appropriate for future reference. By skimming the table of contents the students can usually identify the appropriateness of the book.
<dt>
3. Book Reviews are based on the students’ findings Tom the previously mentioned Library Research. Another way of explaining a book review is to name it a book report, a one to two page report of a book read.
<dt>
4. Guest Speakers
<dt>
A.
<dt>
Audobon St.
<dt>
B. Art Teachers within school building
<dt>
5. Field Trips
<dt>
A. Eli Whitney Museum
<dt>
Whitney Avenue
<dt>
B. The connecticut Historical Society
<dt>
Whitney Avenue
<dt>
C.
<dt>
Audobon St.
<dt>
D. Durham Historical Society
<dt>
Main St., Durham, CT.
<dt>
E. Durham Fair-Last weekend in September
<dt>
Main St., Durham, CT
<dt>
F. Guilford Fair ( September)
<dt>
6. Follow up the field trips with a written paper about what was learned. Liked or disliked.
<dt>
7. Designer’ s Day—Designate one day for students to display their designs of clothing for men, women and children to the school. Vote on 1st place, 2nd. place, and 3rd place and bring the design to life by making a pattern and se wing the article to be modeled at the quarterly or yearly awards ceremony.
<dt>
8. Rent a spinning wheel to use or maKe one.
<dt>
9. Have students create advertisements to promote particular designs and materials.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Where to Find Readings
</h2>
World Book Encyclopedia, Volumes 15, 20, and 22
<p>
Child craft How and Why Library, Volume 11
</p>
<p>
Encyclopedia Britannica, Volumes 20, 22
</p>
<p>
Looms Introduction of Power Looms, SCSU Library Nathan Appleton
</p>
<p>
From Craft to Industry, Esther M. Goody
</p>
<p>
The Story of Weaving, Louise Lamprey
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Bibliography For Teachers
</h2>
<font size="-1">
———,
<i>
——— Polyesters
</i>
, London Pub. 1967 Appleton, Nathan,
<i>
Looms
</i>
<p>
<i>
Introduction of Power Looms
</i>
(Microfilm), 1958
</p>
<p>
Atwater, Mary (Megis)
<i>
The Shuttle Craft of American Hand Weaving
</i>
, MacMillian Pub. N. Y. 1954.
</p>
<p>
Atwater, Mary (Megis)
<i>
Byways on Handweaving
</i>
, MacMillian Pub., 1954.
</p>
<p>
Bythell, Duncan, The Handloom Weavers: A Study, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1969.
</p>
</font>
<hr/>
<h2>
For Students
</h2>
<font size="-1">
Cavenport, Elsie G.,
<i>
our Hand Weaving
</i>
, Sylvan Press, London, 1950.
<p>
Lamprey Louise,
<i>
The Story of Weaving
</i>
, FA Stokes Co., N. Y., 1939.
</p>
<p>
Wright, Ernest, Hunter, and Wright, Mary Heritage,
<i>
Richards Topical Encyclopedia
</i>
, Volume 9. The Richard Co., Inc., 1957.
</p>
<p>
<i>
World Book Encyclopedia
</i>
, Field Enterprises Educational Co., Volume 20, 15, 22, 1986.
</p>
<p>
Goody, Esther, M.,
<i>
From Craft to Industry
</i>
, Cambridge Press Mass, N. Y., 1982.
</p>
<p>
Craft Books
</p>
<p>
Crowell, Ivan Herrett,
<i>
Popular Weaving Crafts
</i>
, Peoria, Ill., 1950.
</p>
<p>
Hooper, Luther,
<i>
Handloom Weaving, Plain &amp; Ornamental
</i>
, Ditman Press Pub. Go., NY, 1920.
</p>
<p>
Never, Carolyn,
<i>
Yarn: The Things it Makes and How to Make Them
</i>
, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., NY, 1972.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Child Craft How and Why Library
</i>
, Make and Do Volume 11, Scott Fetzer Co., Chicago c 1985.
</p>
</font>
</body>