---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 89.07.02"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1989/7/89.07.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "Changes in Lifestyle Due to Electricity"
unitAuthor: "Grayce P. Storey"
keywords: "Accounting Computers Technology Growth"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for General Science classes, grade 6; Life Science classes, grade 7; and Physical Science classes, grades 8 and 9"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 89.07.02:
</h4>
To wait for the sun to rise before you are able to see would be a terrible thing today. The people who discovered fire found out it could light rooms at night. Those who could afford it used candles. Later, a fuel kerosene was used in special lamps. As time passed an illuminating gas provided light in the homes and on the streets. Finally, electricity came along and now practically all have artificial light.
<p>
Since the invention of electricity, man has not been able to get along without it. Electricity is a form of energy. Energy has the capacity to do work. Today there seems to be a never ending stream of machines that do a myriad of jobs for man to make his lifestyle less taxing and in many instances very comfortable. It is through electrical technology that this has all been made possible. Man’s lifestyle has been enhanced socioeconomically in transportation, jobs, and leisure time.
</p>
<p>
This unit is a basic unit on electricity. This unit will be used in the seventh grade Life Science class, and can also be used in grades six through nine. This unit deals with a hands on approach to understanding electricity. This unit is directed toward: 1) personalities responsible for the discovery and enhancement of electricity such as Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, Benjamin Franklin, and Joseph Latimer; 2) electricity as a source of energy that may be converted from gas and coal through the mechanism of an engine; 3) energy conservation guidelines; and 4) safety rules. Included also are a vocabulary list, lesson plans, footnotes, teacher reading list, student reading list, hands on activities, and bibliography. Recommended also is a suggested field trip, film strip, and resource presentations.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for General Science classes, grade 6; Life Science classes, grade 7; and Physical Science classes, grades 8 and 9)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Accounting Computers Technology Growth
</i>
</p>
</body>