---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 89.07.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1989/7/89.07.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Operating Electric Kitchen Appliances"
unitAuthor: "Devra L. Doolin"
keywords: "Electrical Social Implications Science Sociology Impacts Technology"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Home Economics classes, grade 8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 89.07.04:
</h4>
This unit explores the conversion of electricity in kitchen appliances. Students are taught what electricity is, how it works, and what it does for various kitchen appliances. An appliance was taken from each of the electrical conversion categories. In this specific unit, the blender, mixer, toaster oven, and the microwave oven were explored to determine the suitability for various food preparation tasks, operating procedures, safety precautions, and the care and maintenance for each one. Students learn how each of the units function, in addition to learning which utensils are appropriate for each appliance. Teaching strategies include experiments which demonstrate learning objectives, a film containing demonstrations used with a study-guide, a game illustrating the concept of electricity, along with other teacher-developed worksheets and experiment evaluations.
<p>
The emphasis in this unit is weighted on the microwave oven. The reading list contains a great deal of information which gives teachers flexibility and room for expansion. There are suggested recipes to achieve learning outcomes with evaluations at the end. A list of food supplies (based on recipes included in the unit) is provided at the end of the sample worksheets. It is designed to be taught in eleven class periods, with daily lesson objectives provided for the convenience of the teacher.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Home Economics classes, grade 8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Electrical Social Implications Science Sociology Impacts Technology
</i>
</p>
</body>