---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 85.07.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1985/7/85.07.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Three Dimensional Art of Vertebrates and Invertebrates"
unitAuthor: "Sondra A. White"
keywords: "Anatomy Human Art Instruction"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Art I, II, and III classes, grades 9 through 12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 85.07.07:
</h4>
This unit contains two parts: the anatomy of the human skeleton and the anatomy of a shell. The lessons are presented as art lessons. It is necessary to give a basic scientific background for bones in the human skeleton. There are six parts to the human skeleton section that will lead up in sequence to the full figure drawings. Students will learn to draw the front and profile head, the neck and head, the arm, the hand, the leg bone including the foot and simplified figure drawings. I hope the students will be able to see that the bones articulate by way of the joints fitting into other bones. This should help the student when drawing different skeletal sections.
<p>
In the second part of this unit, I will look into exo-skeletons: univalve and bivalve shells. The comparison of the human skeleton to the shell will show the students that shells wear their skeletons on the outside while humans wear their skeleton on the inside. Facts regarding shells and shell growth will be given to the students before they begin to draw different shells.
</p>
<p>
Students will be able to draw invertebrate (the animals that live inside the shell) shells and vertebrate (human skeleton) forms. This unit is 12 weeks: 8 weeks on human skeleton and weeks on shell anatomy. At the completion of this unit, students will be able to draw and color the human skeleton and univalve and bivalve shells.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Art I, II, and III classes, grades 9 through 12)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Anatomy Human Art Instruction
</i>
</p>
</body>