---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 85.07.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1985/7/85.07.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Crusty Fossils"
unitAuthor: "Carolyn C. Smith"
keywords: "Inland Wetlands Connecticut Ecology Environmental Science Geology"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science classes, grade 6"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 85.07.03:
</h4>
This unit traces the history of arthropods from the beginning of time to the present. There are more specific details of the crab, which is one of the animals found in the crustacea class of arthropoda, describing its physical characteristics, habits, structure, and development.
<p>
This unit is designed to be used exclusively in a science class. However, there are times when a teacher may wish to develop certain skills in other subject areas. They need a topic which would be of interest to the students and still teach a particular concept. Keeping this in mind, I would suggest that this unit be correlated with all subject areas.
</p>
<p>
The following are some sample skills which the students can develop by using the information presented in this unit. The students will be able to develop skills:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. in reading charts and graphs,
<dt>
2. in creative writing,
<dt>
3. in the use of reference materials,
<dt>
4. in reading maps; including latitudes and longitudes,
<dt>
5. of comparison and contrast, and
<dt>
6. in using rulers and other measuring devices.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
The sample lessons presented give a general idea of other ways in which this unit can be used. As you can see, the information presented has unlimited ways of developing skills which children, especially slow and/or low achievers, are lacking in order to feel successful.
<p>
(Recommended for Science classes, grade 6)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Inland Wetlands Connecticut Ecology Environmental Science Geology
</i>
</p>
</body>