---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1988/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1988/1/88.01.03.x.html">88.01.03</a> <br/> Students will learn of the history and nature of segregation in the U. S. <br/> Major Supreme Court decisions relevant to segregation will be studied. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.01.x.html">88.02.01</a> <br/> In this unit students studying French will examine the history and culture of Acadians and Cajuns who settled in Louisiana. They will explore how their French culture has influenced the United States. The many engaging activities span literature, writing, and art. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.02.x.html">88.02.02</a> <br/> Emphasizing the artistic tradition that grew out of the Harlem Renaissance, students will become familiar with the work of prominent African American artists, writers, and musicians, as well as others. Students apply stylistics of artists studied to their own art projects. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.03.x.html">88.02.03</a> <br/> This unit is a comparative study of the conditions that lured the Italians, Slavs, and Blacks to industrialized urban centers of the U.S. Examining the manner in which these groups were received by established populations, students will appreciate the struggles endured by these groups to become viable members of our society. Significant background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.04.x.html">88.02.04</a> <br/> Ethnic humor is the focus of a study of ethnicity and its implications on how we view ourselves and each other. Discusses topics such as diversity, stereotypes, and immigration trends. Draws on an array of interesting resources and is full of activities emphasizing analysis, creative writing, critical thinking, and reading. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.05.x.html">88.02.05</a> <br/> An informative study highlights the contributions of Black American individuals and organizations within the New Haven community during the 1800s and early 1900s. Includes written and oral historical accounts and seeks to reinforce positive role models, cultural literacy, and self esteem for youngsters. Family tree handout seems to be an interesting activity. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/2/88.02.06.x.html">88.02.06</a> <br/> Through studying immigration in America students will become aware of the difficulties faced by immigrants in the past and present and will more appreciate this diversity as a source of renewed strength. Relates to the cultural heritages of most students. Contains significant background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/3/88.03.03.x.html">88.03.03</a> <br/> Students will read and discuss select autobiographical material, focusing primarily on Zora Neal Hustron's <i>Their</i> <i>Eyes</i>' <i>Were</i> <i>Watching</i> <i>God</i> for the purpose of forging connections between readings and their personal experience. Many interesting writing exercises are included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/3/88.03.07.x.html">88.03.07</a> <br/> In this unit, several excerpts from novels and short stories by black authors will be read by students and modeled in their own writing. This unit seeks to improve writing skills through a variety of writing prompts, activities, and a step by step process toward publishing original material. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1988/3/88.03.10.x.html">88.03.10</a> <br/> Through the reading of several autobiographical short stories, each representing a different cultural view point, students of various backgrounds will have an opportunity to relate to the familiar as well as the different. The rewards of this unit include an increase in self esteem and respect of others. Motivates students to express themselves through writing. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>