---
layout: "page"
title: "02"
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/2002/"
---
<main>  <meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/> <meta content="Microsoft Word 97" name="Generator"/> <title>02</title>   <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.01.x.html">02.01.01</a> <p>In this unit related to the Holocaust, students read and analyze two narrative works based upon survival, <i>Fragments and Memories of a Wartime Childhood</i>, by Binjamin Wilkomirski and <i>Maus I</i> and <i>Maus II</i>, by Art Spiegelman. In addition, a section on related photography provides another means of understanding. Unit contains appropriate background information, a CAPT lesson, and activities involving student writing. </p> <p>(Recommended for English Literature, History, and Photography, grades 7-12)</p> <p>As students read and discuss a short story and two books, they will make a human connection to the experience of slavery in the United States. Primary readings include the <i>Amistad Slave Revolt</i> <i>and American Abolition</i>, by Karen Zeinert, Abd al Rahman Ibrahima from<i> Now is Your Time: The African American Struggle for Freedom,</i> by Walter Dean Myers, and <i>The Captive</i>, by Joyce Hansen. </p> <p>(Recommended for Language Arts, Reading, and Social Studies, grade 5-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.04.x.html">02.01.04</a> <p>Through the use of film and literature, this unit examines, compares, and contrasts the lives of three young people, Anne Frank, Ruby Bridges, and Ryan White, who have faced tremendous obstacles during their lives. Integrated activities focus on books and films related to each survivor. Contains appropriate background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Reading, Language Arts, Social Studies, Science and Social Development, grades 3-8)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.05.x.html">02.01.05</a>
<p>With an emphasis on Ghanaian culture, this unit examines pre-slavery Africa, slave trade, and African traditions embraced today, as it attempts to foster understanding, connections, and appreciation. Contains considerable background information and a variety of potential resources.</p> <p>(Recommended for Language Arts, Social Studies and Social Development, grades 1-5)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.06.x.html">02.01.06</a> <p>This unit uses diverse children’s literature to help students who are struggling to master a second language. In highlighting four representative books, activities hope to develop literacy skills and a desire to survive and succeed. </p> <p>(Recommended for Language Arts and Social Studies, grades K-4) </p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.07.x.html">02.01.07</a> <p>Using a variety of media, students examine both historical and fictitious events in which survival played a significant role. For example, literature, film, and art combine to provide students with a multidimensional picture of Harriet Tubman. Unit’s explorations result in a five-paragraph essay.</p> <p>(Recommended for English and World Literature, grades 9-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.08.x.html">02.01.08</a> <p>In an attempt to help students cope with different life situations, this unit examines individuals, real and fictitious, who have survived. In three of the five stories presented, obstacles faced by some African Americans are presented. </p> <p>(Recommended for History, Language Arts, and Science, grades 5-7)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/1/02.01.10.x.html">02.01.10</a> <p>Integrating the art of puppetry and the stories of Faith Ringgold, this unit attempts to help children look beyond present difficulties. Books which are highlighted include <i>Tar Beach</i>, <i>Aunt Harriet’s Underground Railroad in the Sky</i>, and <i>Dinner at Aunt Connie’s House</i>. Lessons emphasize literature but integrate writing, drama, music, and crafts. Unit includes an original culminating play.</p> <p>(Recommended for Reading and Language Arts, grades K-3)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/2/02.02.01.x.html">02.02.01</a> <p>Focusing on Egypt, Iraq, Israel, and Saudi Arabia, this unit exposes students to the Middle East. Material lends itself to individual, small group, and large group assignments. Contains background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Language Arts and Social Studies, grade 4)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/2/02.02.02.x.html">02.02.02</a> <p>With an emphasis on Lebanese children, this unit discusses home life, school, food, religion, and recreation. Covers the diverse Arab subcultures which comprise Lebanese culture. Integrated activities culminate in a "street festival" demonstrating various aspects of Lebanese culture. Contains appropriate background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Social Studies, Art, Music, and Language Arts, grades 1-6)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/2/02.02.03.x.html">02.02.03</a> <p>Intended for middle school ESOL students, this unit is also appropriate for all students. Participating in a variety of hands-on art projects, students learn about some of the traditional arts of the Middle East, including their relationship to the Islamic faith. All activities are designed to allow students to acquire English skills. Contains background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Social Studies, Art, and ESOL, grades 5-8)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.03.x.html">02.03.03</a> <p>While examining the peacekeeping role of the United Nations as a model for resolving intergroup conflict, students learn of the diversity among nations of the world. They also conduct a personal study of the diversity in their neighborhood.</p> <p>(Recommended for World History, Contemporary Issues, History, and Social Studies, grades 9-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.04.x.html">02.03.04</a> <p>Using a lecture/discussion approach modeled closely on an undergraduate college course, this unit has students attempting to find what role ethnic identity and nationalism played in twentieth century conflict. Contains background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for World History, grade 11, Western Civilization, grade 9, and Global Studies, grades 9-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.05.x.html">02.03.05</a> <p>As students study and debate the brewing conflicts in post-World War II Indochina, they learn of the region’s history and cultures. Students apply their knowledge to conduct a debate on the region’s fate.</p> <p>(Recommended for U.S. History, World History, and French, grades 7-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.06.x.html">02.03.06</a> <p>With a focus on several painters, highlighting Picasso, who refused to leave France despite the danger of war, this unit studies both art and culture. Contains considerable background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Art History, World/European History, French, and French Art, grades 9-12)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.07.x.html">02.03.07</a> <p>As students study the role of African Americans in the United States military, they learn of the achievements, heroism, and the discrimination faced as a result of racism. The unit takes an historical approach, as well as a personal look at individual African Americans.</p> <p>(Recommended for U.S. History, grades 10-12, especially advanced students)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.08.x.html">02.03.08</a> <p>Cultural diversity, values, and how the world is shaped by these factors, form an underlying goal of this unit, through a focus on the issues of war and peace in the context of children’s lives.</p> <p>(Recommended for Integrated Social Studies and Language Arts, grades 2-4)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/3/02.03.09.x.html">02.03.09</a> <p>Focusing on the role of women and the changes they experienced in World War I and World War II, students learn of the diverse status represented by women throughout United States history. Contains background information.</p> <p>(Recommended for Reading, Social Studies, and History, grade 8)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/4/02.04.04.x.html">02.04.04</a> <p>Through the use of multicultural literature, this unit attempts to reinforce bilingual students’ understanding of their culture and to create a dialogue among them which leads to activities designed to increase their writing skills.</p> <p>(Recommended for Language Arts, ESL, and Social Studies, grades 3-6)</p> <a href="../../../guides/2002/4/02.04.08.x.html">02.04.08</a> <p>In order to learn more about classmates, while hopefully accepting and encouraging the multicultural and diverse school community, students develop their acting skills, while coming to a better understanding of themselves and others.</p> <p>(Recommended for Acting, grade 9, and Drama, grades 9-10)</p> 
</main>