---
layout: "page"
title: "Preface"
path: "/brochures/D6/Preface.html"
---
<main>
<center><h2><a name="top">Preface</a></h2></center>
<hr/>
<b><font size="+0"><a href="/brochures/D6/">Progress Report Contents</a>
</font></b>
<hr/>
<table>
<tbody><tr>
<td width="85%">
<p>The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute may well be the most enduring of the
school-college collaborations that have emerged during the past 20 years
to enhance the quality of pre-college education. It has also been one of
the most successful by any number of different measures.
</p>
<p>The YNHTI is a joint activity of Yale University and the New Haven
school district. Through the Institute, New Haven teachers and Yale
faculty collaborate in the development of curriculum units. In the
process, teachers who participate as Fellows of the Institute expand their
disciplinary knowledge and, as will be documented in the report that
follows, experience enhanced morale, and perceive improvements in their
students' learning. Faculty, by their own admission, develop an
appreciation of the conditions and circumstances that prevail in secondary
and, more recently, middle and even elementary school education in New
Haven.
</p>
<p>The heart of the Institute program is a series of seminars held during
the spring and summer on the University campus. Over the course of each
seminar, Yale faculty and New Haven teachers explore an area of interest
to both. Readings are assigned and discussed with an eye to creating,
eventually, a set of curriculum units related to the area. The Yale
faculty members who are seminar "leaders" contribute their background in
the subject. New Haven teacher Fellows who are seminar participants
contribute their expertise in pedagogy and their knowledge of students and
the New Haven schools. Together, the participants create curriculum units
that find their way into New Haven classrooms, those taught by Fellows and
those taught by other teachers who find the units potentially useful.
</p>
<p>There are other features of the Institute. A lecture series, assistance
in the writing of units, availability of University campus facilities for
use by the teachers, and school year meetings of Fellows within their own
schools and at the University. All of these activities serve the objective
of collegiality: between Fellows and Yale faculty, between schools and the
University, among teachers across schools.
</p>
<p>From the start, every facet of the Institute was developed
collaboratively. Decisions have typically been achieved through consensus.
Emphasis has been given in all Institute activities to crossing
disciplines and schools and breaking down traditional barriers and the
sources of professional isolation that have marked the teaching
profession. Thus, Yale faculty lead seminars that transcend traditional
disciplines. University faculty and school personnel work as colleagues in
the exploration of subject matter and the creation of curriculum units.
Teachers from different schools and disciplines work together in seminars
and during the school year in activities related to the Institute and to
the dissemination of the curriculum units.
</p>
<p>The Institute itself has attempted to overcome the insularity that
often marks attempts to effect changes in organizations and institutions.
The Institute model was developed and refined through reviews of other
efforts at creating collaborations between universities and public
schools. Once the model had been adopted, Institute staff established and
maintained contact with other school- university collaborations. The
Yale-New Haven Institute has always been well represented at conferences
on collaborative approaches to school reform. Moreover, the Institute has
itself sponsored a major conference on school- university collaboration
and has contributed in major ways to conferences sponsored by others.
Dissemination of the Yale-New Haven model and the exchange of information
with other similar programs has long been an objective of the Institute.
</p>
<p>Since its inception in 1977, the planners and organizers of the
Institute have engaged in an ongoing process of reflection and self
evaluation. The process is fueled by a set of principles that guide the
program. These include a belief in the fundamental importance of teaching
as the basis for educational effectiveness, an emphasis on collaboration
and collegiality among teachers at all levels, and an insistence that
programs intended to change education can be effective only if they are
long-term and involve teachers as leaders. The principles have been
responsible for the particular focus and shape of the program, and have
been the filter through which all evaluation has been viewed.
</p>
<p>The director of the Institute has been careful, throughout the history
of the collaboration, to maintain a perspective that combines on going
evaluation and fine, tuning of program elements with a firm commitment to
the original goals and scale of the project. Pressures to expand,
disseminate, or change particular features of the program based on
changing fashions in education have been weighed and ultimately rejected
out of deference to the major mission of the collaboration. Such changes
as have been made have been undertaken as a function of the collective
wishes of Fellows expressed in their written evaluations of the Institute,
or as responses to perceived needs that fall within the Institute's
mission. For example, only after considerable institutional soul-searching
and careful consideration of the meaning of the move did the Institute
add, in 1990, elementary school teachers to its roster of Fellows,
formerly restricted to the middle and high school ranks. The inclusion of
a small cadre of elementary school teachers happened only after the
Institute staff had reassured themselves that the change would not dilute
the focus on subject matter that is a defining characteristic of the
collaboration.</p>
<p>Evaluation has been a priority for the Institute from the outset.
Consistent with its reflective and self-critical stance, Institute staff
have employed a variety of techniques for assessing the operations and
outcomes of the Institute and for using and disseminating the results of
these efforts. In fact, evaluation activities have served the Institute as
one more vehicle for collaboration: with prospective evaluators in the
service of focusing the evaluation; with participants in deciding what to
evaluate and interpreting results; and with potential audiences in
tailoring reports to the information needs of others. Sensitivity to its
many constituencies has required that the Institute collect different
kinds of information and employ different evaluation strategies. Institute
staff have concerned themselves with gathering data both to inform their
own reflective process and to share their successes with external
audiences. The latter include the collaborating institutions (Yale
University and the New Haven Public Schools), funders and prospective
funders, and other educators and policy makers engaged in or considering
similar collaborative ventures.</p>
<p>The organizers of the Institute have envisioned several purposes for
evaluation: documenting and examining the impact of collaboration on
teaching and learning; assessing the success of the Institute in achieving
its intended outcomes (and, possibly, outcomes that were not intended);
understanding the ways in which it (and, by implication, other
collaborative programs) might contribute to the enhancement of education
in schools; and providing data that might be used to communicate the
accomplishments and successes of the programs to diverse audiences. 
As a result, the Institute staff have employed a variety of evaluative
strategies that transcend the traditional distinction between formative
and summative evaluation. From the very beginning, planning the program
has been a collaborative enterprise, involving an almost constant process
of considering and evaluating each component of the program. Readings of
participants' reactions to program policies and components have been taken
regularly, in both formal and informal fashion. (The report that follows
is one testimony to the formal side.) Over the course of its existence,
particularly in its early years, the Institute invited important observers
of public education and educational change to visit and comment in writing
on their visits. A catalog has been maintained of the curriculum units
created by Institute participants; a summative analysis was performed of
the units in 1988. The Institute staff have collected data from and about
the New Haven Public Schools, about Fellows and non Fellows, to assess the
extent of the Institute's influence in the schools and its impact on
retention of teachers. Comprehensive questionnaires have been completed by
Fellows every year since the beginning of the Institute, reporting on a
wide range of topics from their reactions to the Institute through their
attitudes toward educational reform. The earliest questionnaires evoked
essays based on open-ended questions posed by the Institute staff. Over
time, themes in the responses to these questions became the basis for a
more structured set of questions. Starting in 1992, lengthy questionnaires
that included multiple-choice and open-ended questions were administered
annually to Fellows. In 1982 and 1987, parallel questionnaires were
administered as well to all of the teachers then teaching in New Haven.
This report describes many of the responses to these questionnaires.
</p>
<p>What is most notable about the findings reported here is their
consistency. Although each Institute year brings a new crop of Fellows
(albeit many Fellows return for repeat engagements with the Institute),
the responses of Fellows to their experiences with the Institute have been
similar. With great uniformity, Fellows describe their Institute
experiences enthusiastically. They credit the Institute with enhancing
their interest in the subjects they teach, increasing their engagement
with teaching, and augmenting their senses of autonomy in their
classrooms. They are unfailingly positive about the benefits to them of
participation in the seminars and about the experience of having prepared
their curriculum units. Such consistency of responses is manifest not only
among each year's Fellows, but among Fellows across years. This
consistency of findings was entirely unexpected. The teachers who have
been Fellows of the Institute are a heterogeneous group. They teach
different subjects and different grades. Their preparation is varied; they
majored in different fields as undergraduates. Moreover, they teach the
full range of students who attend the New Haven Public Schools. In short,
the Fellows are representative of the larger population of New Haven
teachers.
</p>
<p>This representativeness would also be a surprise to early observers of
the Institute plan who predicted that the Institute would attract teachers
mainly from the ranks of those who teach advanced and honors classes and
the most academically talented students in the schools. It had also been
predicted that the Fellows would represent only the most motivated New
Haven teachers.
</p>
<p>Instead, Fellows represent all of the subjects and levels included in
the middle and high schools of New Haven. That this diverse group of
teachers experience the effects of the Institute in similar ways and
report consistently positive reactions over time is remarkable indeed.
</p>
<p>The dimensions of positive response correspond to some of the major
concerns that plague education today. As will become apparent in the body
of the report, Fellows reports of the benefits of Institute participation
address issues of isolation and alienation, of feelings of competence, and
of motivation among teachers.
</p>
<p>Prior to 1982, when Fellows' reactions to the Institute were captured
in mini- essays stimulated by sets of open-ended questions, Fellows
identified the scholarship of the seminar leaders and the collegial nature
of the atmosphere in seminars as some of the most important aspects of the
Institute for them. Other features that Fellows identified spontaneously
in their early evaluations, and acknowledged with considerable
appreciation, were the process of developing and refining their curriculum
units, and the balance maintained in their seminars between the study of a
topic and the development of curriculum units. The benefits of
participation that recurred in early accounts by Fellows inevitably
included improved morale and professionalism, and intellectual
stimulation. These topics became the focus of multiple-choice questions
when the evaluation questionnaires assumed a more constructed format,
mainly because they had been the topics most frequently discussed by
Fellows in their free-form responses.
</p>
<p>The more formal approach to surveying Fellows allowed for the addition
of topics and the diversification of the evaluation. Since the Institute
was established in the context of major efforts at reforming the teaching
profession nationally, a major series of questions in the questionnaires
address school reform and related issues. In the years that followed,
Fellows (and their colleagues who did not participate as Fellows, when
asked) expressed skepticism about some of the more procedural approaches
to reform. Examples of these are lengthening the school day and increasing
the number of days in the school year. Both groups-Fellows and non-
Fellows-were more positively inclined toward raising standards for
themselves and their colleagues. They reserved their greatest enthusiasm
for enhancing professionalism among teachers and increasing opportunities
for teachers to assume leadership roles in schools and in the profession.
</p>
<p>These sentiments are particularly interesting in the context of
Fellows' reactions to another set of questions, those focusing on the
relative benefits of various facets of their Institute experience. Fellows
were most appreciative of the avenues that the Institute offered them for
professional growth and leadership. Given these responses, Fellows'
enthusiasm for the enhancement of professionalism among teachers as a
potentially fruitful approach to reform is not surprising. Whether their
reactions to the reform proposals are a function of their Institute
experiences or they chose to participate in the Institute because of their
beliefs in the potential benefits to schools of increased professionalism,
the two sets of reactions are consistent. What is somewhat surprising is
that non-Fellows agree, suggesting strongly that the Institute approach to
reform is one that is attractive to teachers and that fits with their
beliefs. It is also significant that Fellows characterized their Institute
experiences as more relevant to and valuable for their professional growth
than other in service programs they had experienced.
</p>
<p>Other reactions of Fellows to the Institute are related to their
reactions to proposals for school reform. Fellows reported that their
Institute experiences enhanced collegiality with other teachers in the New
Haven schools and with Yale faculty. In their ratings of selected features
of the Institute as incentives to participate and as benefits to them,
Fellows gave high marks to those features that were consistent with their
preferences for reform. For example, the joint opportunities to create a
curriculum unit (thereby, according to their ratings, increasing their
autonomy in the classroom) and to do interdisciplinary work (thereby
enhancing their professionalism and relations with colleagues) were among
the highest-rated incentives for and benefits of participation in the
Institute. For most Fellows, the ability to interact with Yale faculty was
a recurring incentive for participation and a highly valued feature of the
Institute program.
</p>
<p>The ultimate goal of any program intended to improve education is, of
course, the enhancement of student learning. Wisely, the Yale-New Haven
Institute has focused its attention on teachers, reasoning that teachers
who are engaged will inevitably translate their own engagement into
enhanced learning for students. By all available measures, the Institute
has succeeded in engaging teachers in important ways. Because its
philosophical commitment and primary responsibility has always been to
teachers, Institute staff have focused on teachers as the primary targets
of evaluation activities. Questionnaires administered to Fellows and non
Fellows have repeatedly probed the major dimensions of the Institute
program and most of the foreseeable effects for teachers. In the context
of the primacy of teachers in the Institute philosophy, this approach to
assessing outcomes is entirely appropriate. Fellows are the immediate
audience of Institute programs; non-Fellows are the next in importance.
</p>
<p>Given the difficulty of assessing second-order effects directly, the
Fellows' questionnaires have asked questions about Fellows' perceptions of
their students' reactions to their teaching following their Institute
experience, and to the units developed through Institute participation.
Parallel questions about students' reactions to Institute units have also
been asked of non-Fellows who use such units. In virtually all cases,
student responses have been perceived as positive, to the units themselves
and to the units when compared with non-Institute materials traditionally
used in the same classes. These responses suggest that teachers, even
those who did not participate as Fellows perceive some positive influence
of the Institute on students. But the definitive study of student reaction
has yet to be conducted.
</p>
<p>This circumstance is not unique to the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute. It is typically the case with programs that seek to effect
improvement in education by focusing their efforts on teachers, that the
effects for students are difficult to assess directly. There are a number
of possible reasons for this difficulty. One is that the outcomes for
teachers are often diffuse. This means that they may take different forms
in different teachers, and result in different behaviors. These behaviors,
already different for different teachers, may translate into different
classroom experiences for students. In the majority of the translations
may be positive, they do not lend themselves to a limited set of potential
outcome measures for students.
</p>
<p>A related reason is that effects for students may not be felt directly
but rather are embedded in intermediate outcomes that are difficult to
operationalize and measure. For example, there is good evidence that
participation in the Institute enhances the likelihood that good teachers
remain in the New Haven Public Schools. Common sense dictates that
retaining good teachers cannot but improve conditions for students.
However, demonstrating this common sense tenet is not easy. Identifying
and documenting student outcomes poses a difficult challenge even for
programs, like the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, that have
demonstrated consistently positive outcomes and important benefits for
teachers. It is undoubtedly the case that the task will require a new and
different approach. The questionnaire survey method that has prevailed and
been so successful in characterizing teacher reactions since the beginning
of the Institute will probably not work for students, at least at the
outset. A method for documenting student reaction will need to take
account of the range and variety of subjects, classes and students
represented by Institute teachers, and the concomitant range and variety
of ways in which students might be influenced. The challenge suggests a
process that starts (once again) with the teachers. The process would
probe in some depth and probably in open-ended fashion at first, the range
of reactions that teachers observe in their students. When some of the
more common reactions have been identified and catalogued, appropriate
avenues may be developed for assessing the extent to which this set of
reactions can be detected in students, by their own reports and the
reports of observers. It is surely a worthy goal, as the Institute
reflects on its substantial record of achievement in enhancing the
professional lives of teachers, to begin to reflect on and develop a
systematic approach to assessing the impact of its work on students.
</p>
<p>A final note: Like all evaluations everywhere, the questionnaires
completed by Fellows concentrate on those facets of the Institute that are
common across the majority of Fellows. Analyses of the results of the
questionnaires focus on central tendencies and group trends. What is
missing from this report (and other reports on group reactions) is an
accounting of the many ways in which individuals have been affected
personally by the Institute. Participants become inspired, moved,
energized, heartened, or aroused in idiosyncratic ways. In turn, they
impart or transmit their reactions to others: their colleagues, students,
families, friends. It is with such reactions that important changes in
education often originate. Yet they evade the often crude investigative
tools of evaluation studies, focused as the latter are on measurable
phenomena. Even the statements of individual Institute participants that
are woven into the pages of this report serve more to support and
illustrate the major findings of the study than to illuminate the
individual reactions that are probably the Institute's most compelling
effects.
</p>
<p>In the coming years, as Institute staff contemplate a more secure
future, the results of the past twelve years of evaluation offer a strong
foundation for assessing the continuing role of the Institute in a
changing educational climate. For now, the questionnaire results provide
evidence of a productive history.
</p>
<p>Gita Z. Wilder
<br/>Division of Education Policy Research
<br/>Educational Testing Service</p>
</td>
<td>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<div align="right"><a href="#top">to the top of Preface</a></div>
<hr/>
© 1992 by the <a href="/">Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</a>
</main>