---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 88.02.05"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1988/2/88.02.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Insights of American Blacks in New Haven, Connecticut During the 19th and 20th Centuries"
unitAuthor: "Barbara W. Coles Trader"
keywords: "Afro-American History New Haven Connecticut 18th 19th Century Literature"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for English Literature/Reading classes, grades 6-12; and Social Studies classes, grades 6-12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 88.02.05:
</h4>
<font size="-1">
<dl>
<dt>
The curriculum unit addresses mainly two Afro-American organizations, churches, several businesses and individuals who did so much to improve Black culture and racial pride in the New Haven, Connecticut community. The City of New Haven is celebrating its 350th Anniversary during 1988. I saw a need to highlight the involvement of American Blacks during the 1800s and early 1900s in the City of New Haven.
<dt>
The unit can be extended to average ability/adjusted students in grades 5-12. “We the People Can Do and I Can Do”: “Can Do” are important words to people from all ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Thus, it is very important to continually acknowledge outstanding contributions that Blacks have made in their country, to inform other ethnic groups, and to reinforce positive role-models, cultural literacy and self-esteem for our youngsters.
<dt>
The unit encourages the students to use various reading, writing and critical thinking strategies. There are written oral-historical accounts composed by the author of this unit; the biographies are such as Polly McCabe, the Smith-Ruby family hairdressers, and Granddaughter Beverly Fernandes Huckaby of Unique Boutique. Information about the St Luke’s Episcopal Church, Dixwell Avenue Congregational Church, Prince Hall Masons, Elks of East Rock Lodge, Curry’s Candy/Confectionary Store, The Monterey Cafe. Many more resources and facts of interest are included in the unit.
<dt>
(Recommended for English Literature/Reading classes, grades 6-12; and Social Studies classes, grades 6-12)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</font>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Afro-American History New Haven Connecticut 18th 19th Century Literature
</i>
</p>
</body>