---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1986/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1986/1/86.01.05.x.html">86.01.05</a> <br/> After examining the family in historical terms, this unit uses literature to explore the modern family across various cultures, with emphasis on the effects of poverty, prejudice, and the dominant culture. Finally students investigate the dynamics of their own family. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/2/86.02.01.x.html">86.02.01</a> <br/> This unit provides a description of what the Spaniards found on Puerto Rico in 1493 and how they colonized their first seven towns. It provides classes with insight into the cultural and historical background of Puerto Rico. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/2/86.02.02.x.html">86.02.02</a> <br/> This unit attempts to describe the character of Latin America today by examining its history and geography. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/2/86.02.03.x.html">86.02.03</a> <br/> This unit capsulizes the Spanish influence on the New World, the cause and effect of Columbus' discovery. Attempts to develop both pride in Spanish accomplishments and sensitivity to the problems of Native people. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/2/86.02.04.x.html">86.02.04</a> <br/> This unit focuses on “A New World,” “Creole as a New Race,” “Criollismo,” and “Cultural Pluralism.” Contains background information and suggested activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/3/86.03.05.x.html">86.03.05</a> <br/> This unit examines the relationship and likenesses of Italian Renaissance art and architecture to the art and architecture of Wooster Square as well as providing historical information about Wooster square's past, the people, and the area as it existed more than 75 years ago. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/4/86.04.09.x.html">86.04.09</a> <br/> This unit examines twentieth century Black American poetry in a historical context. Contains a wide variety of student-involving activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1986/4/86.04.15.x.html">86.04.15</a> <br/> This unit provides writing instruction for a variety of narrative and expository forms. It consists of three parts: expository journal writing; understanding, enjoying, and responding to poems by Maya Angelou and Julia Alvarez; and lastly writing character sketches of people. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>