---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 16.01.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2016/1/16.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Shakespeare: Scenes of Instruction and the Graphic Novel"
unitAuthor: "Mary-Doris E. Devlin"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: ""
---
<main>
<p>
We will be studying
<em>
Macbeth
</em>
and how the Visual Arts teacher can help enhance a student’s learning experience. The graphic novel form can help students interpret plot, character, and theme through its unique lens. This paper will examine both the purpose and the specifics of having students create their own graphic novel panels using Photoshop and Wacom (electronic drawing) tablets. One area of focus will be inclusion of detail. Deciding what to leave out is just as important as deciding what to leave in. Sometimes the reader’s imagination can conjure up an image that is far more powerful than any image an illustrator can create. Students will also closely consider the importance of visual clues to the reader, asking key questions as they proceed. For example, how will a sense of mood and atmosphere be conveyed? The same scene with different shading and or use of lighting can appear dramatically different. Character expressions are another consideration: How will the scene convey emotions?
</p>
<p>
Students will complete the unit –
<em>
Four Scenes from Macbeth
</em>
– having improved their skills in both literary interpretation and artistic technique.
</p>
<p>
(Developed for Photoshop classes, grades 11-12; recommended for Visual Arts/Digital Arts, English Literature, Shakespeare -
<em>
Macbeth
</em>
, grades 9-12)
</p>
</main>