---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 88.05.05"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1988/5/88.05.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Effects of Hormones on Human Development"
unitAuthor: "Carolyn Kinder"
keywords: "Sexuality Hormones Development"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science classes, grades 7 and 8; and Health classes, grades 7 and 8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 88.05.05:
</h4>
<font size="-1">
<dl>
<dt>
The purpose of designing a unit on “The Affects of Hormones on Human Development,” is to help students learn more about the physical and emotional changes they are experiencing by the time they reach adulthood. This unit on “The Affects of Hormones on Human Development” will deal with the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland, the adrenal glands (the adrenal medulla and the adrenal cortex), placenta, islets of Langerhans, the thyroid gland and the ovaries and testis.
<dt>
Basic information is presented about hormones, and general information is given on hormones and the specific influence they exert on the activity of the target gland.
<dt>
The unit can be taught to students in grades five through eight. The science and health teachers are encouraged to use a team teaching approach. Other features included in the unit are content, lesson plans, resources, and a bibliography.
<dt>
Often children will ask questions repeatedly until they have the chance to assimilate the new facts they are learning. This unit can help students by letting them know that we are receptive to their questions and ready to provide answers, either on a one-to-one basis or to the class as a whole. As a classroom teacher, you may want to take an active part in reinforcing or extending the basic learning your students will be gaining from this unit.
<dt>
I encourage you to work closely with other educators in the school. You may be interested in reviewing the materials that are written by the other six teachers in “The Hormones and Reproduction Program.”
<dt>
(Recommended for Science classes, grades 7 and 8; and Health classes, grades 7 and 8)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</font>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Sexuality Hormones Development
</i>
</p>
</body>