---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 88.06.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1988/6/88.06.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Cause and Effects of Air Pollution"
unitAuthor: "Cheryl E. Merritt"
keywords: "Aerodynamics Mathematics Implications Math Science"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science and Social Studies classes, grades 5-8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 88.06.06:
</h4>
This unit is designed to inform students and teachers of the physical aspects of air pollution and its effects on society. Several approaches may be used in the presentation of this topic. For example, one could discuss each pollutant individually in terms of sources, methods of emission, how it is effected by chemical reactions in the atmosphere, adverse effects, and ultimate fate. Others may prefer to emphasize the functional approach because in most regions where air pollution is considered a problem, a pollutant coexists with other pollutants and there is a continual evolution of the nature of the atmosphere through chemical reactions.
<p>
While concentrating on the physical reasoning of air pollution, students should be able to develop skills in reading, language, mathematics, science, and social studies. The time span would vary according to the depth desired by individual teachers. A recommended period of four to eight weeks would allow the student from below average to be successful. It is geared toward the middle school student in grades five through eight and below average to above average levels.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Science and Social Studies classes, grades 5-8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Aerodynamics Mathematics Implications Math Science
</i>
</p>
</body>