---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/pubs/A18/pearson-davis.html"
---
<main>
<center><h2>
Wrinkle Writing</h2>
<font size="+1">by Susan Pearson-Davis</font>
</center><hr/>
The Wrinkle Writing Project is a collaborative program which  originated
in the University of New Mexico's Department of Theatre  and Dance in
1993.  Its purposes are to use creative drama to enrich  writing
experiences in elementary and secondary classrooms, to  encourage the
inclusion of playwriting in the curriculum, and to use  dramatic
performance to publish student writing.  Currently, most  schools in
Albuquerque do not include playwriting in the curriculum.   Wrinkle
Writing is driven by the belief that dramatizing the written  word
involves students not just intellectually and imaginatively, but
physically, emotionally, and socially as well. Drama can provide a
valuable addition to more traditional approaches to teaching and
learning.
<p>
The idea for Wrinkle Writing emerged when I directed a stage  adaptation
of Madeleine L'Engle's Newbery Award winning novel, <i>A  Wrinkle in
Time</i> in the spring of 1993.  L'Engle, a friend of UNM  emeritus
playwriting professor, Robert Hartung, accepted our  invitation to visit
UNM to teach a writing workshop.  Although the  Department already had
strong ties with Albuquerque high school  drama teachers, I hoped that
L'Engle's visit would help us forge a  relationship with elementary and
secondary language arts teachers  that focused on writing.  L'Engle wanted
her workshop to be  intergenerational, including children and teens as
well as adults, so  her desires dovetailed with mine.
</p><p>
I called colleagues from the College of Education for advice on  making
L'Engle's workshop useful to teachers and children.   Education Professor,
Don Zancanella, who heads the Rio Grande  Writing Project, a chapter of
the National Writing Project, provided  me with the names of elementary
and secondary writing teachers  who would be good at designing a
conference surrounding the  L'Engle workshop. The twelve teachers who
agreed to help us were  all members of the Rio Grande Writing Project, so
they had a strong  philosophical commitment to writing process that
blended  beautifully with the process-orientation of creative drama.
Several  meetings later, the outlines of the Wrinkle Writing Project
(named in  honor of L'Engle's famous novel) emerged, and the Rio Grande
Writing Project agreed to fund teacher stipends for the professional
development training that teachers would need.  Although L'Engle  had to
postpone her visit until March of 1995, the project kept  "Wrinkle" in the
title, took on a life of its own, and has grown to be  more than a single
visit by a famous writer.
</p><p>
Wrinkle Writing now has four components.  The key component is
professional development of teachers.  We train participating  teachers
in: methods for using creative drama and writing workshop  techniques; the
basic concepts of playwriting; and how to use  dramatic staging techniques
such as staged reading, story theatre,  and readers' theatre to stage
their students' written works.  These  team-taught training sessions
include Saturday morning workshops  throughout the school year and an
intensive two week institute in  the summer. UNM playwriting professor and
Emmy Award winner,  Digby Wolfe covers playwriting; classroom teacher
Julia Huchmala  and author Jeanne Whitehouse teach about writing
processes; and I  teach the creative drama.   Participating teachers then
use these  concepts and techniques in their classrooms, and their students
create portfolios of writing stimulated by dramatic improvisations.   Once
a teacher has taken one of our training workshops, that  teacher's
classroom is eligible to be a part of the other components  listed below.
Teachers also receive our bi-monthly <i>Wrinkle Writing  Newsletter</i>
and an extensive curriculum guide.
</p><p>
The second component is the portfolio competition that culminates in  a
visit by a luminary guest writer.  Each year, Wrinkle Writing brings  a
well-known author or playwright to the University of New Mexico.  Students
from participating classrooms who want to attend a  two-day intensive
workshop taught by that writer, submit two  selections from their
portfolios. A panel of ten writing teachers reads  the submissions and
selects the top forty young writers to come to  the UNM campus and attend
that workshop.  Teachers who have  served as portfolio competition judges
also earn the right to attend.   In addition, guest writers give a talk
for all teachers, students, and  parents of students in participating
classrooms.  Madeleine L'Engle  was this year's guest writer.  Last year's
was Newbery Award  winner, Paul Fleischman. 
</p><p>
We designed the third component, the performance troupe, for  teachers who
want an intensive immersion in drama.  We select up  to twelve teachers
from those who apply and assign a UNM theatre  student to visit their
classroom and work with their students twice a  month for an entire school
year.  The UNM theatre student leads  improvisational drama activities to
introduce the concepts and  processes of theatre and to stimulate ideas
for first drafts.  Then the  UNM student organizes informal classroom
readings and  performances of these drafts so students can see their work
on its  feet for purposes of revisions.  Finally, the theatre student
directs  them in a production of their works that they present for the
whole  school.  Teachers find that this extensive demonstration of drama
techniques in their own classroom allows them to learn more about  what
we've introduced in the professional development workshops.
</p><p>
The fourth component of Wrinkle Writing is its showcases.  The UNM
Department of Theatre and Dance produces a showcase of short  works,
written and performed by Wrinkle Writing students who  have been in the
performance troupe.  This gives students the  experience of creating
costumes for their scenes and performing  them in a fully equipped theatre
on campus. The Department of  Theatre and Dance provides a flexible
modular set they can arrange  as needed to serve their scripts and full
stage lighting.  The  performance is free and open to the public, but
heavily attended by  parents, relatives, and friends.  
</p><p>
The portfolio competition generates so much good writing that we  are
adding several more showcases.  Next year, UNM theatre  students will tour
a production of selected Wrinkle Writing pieces to  Albuquerque elementary
and middle schools.  Also next year, a local  youth theatre group,
Theatre-in-the-Making, is joining forces with  Albuquerque Little Theatre,
to produce a selection of works from the  portfolio competition.  These
will allow the young playwrights to see  their work in a polished,
professional production either by college  actors at UNM or by
accomplished child and teenage actors.  In some  cases, the directors will
work with the young playwrights on any  necessary revisions so they learn
what a collaborative art form  theatre is.  This link to community
theatres as well as to schools  significantly enriches the collaboration. 
</p><p>
Thus far, the project has reached approximately  55 teachers and  nearly
2000 students from a wide variety of cultural and linguistic  backgrounds.
Two of our most active classrooms are at the Zuni  Pueblo, and we have had
bilingual students submitting work in  Spanish as well as English.  The
UNM theatre students working for us  include Native Americans, Hispanics,
and African Americans, as well  as Anglo/European Whites.  They provide
important role models for  our young writers. Participating classrooms
also represent the entire  spectrum of ability levels.  Along with their
creative writing,  portfolio competition participants must submit a
"Process Paper"  discussing how and why they wrote their works.  In this
way, judges  can take into account a student's dedication and motivation
in  addition to talent.
</p><p>
We were fortunate to be able to build on an existing network of  excellent
elementary andsecondary writing teachers through the Rio  Grande Writing
Project and these teachers have inspired us with  their talent,
enthusiasm, and commitment.  They quickly discovered  how to integrate
drama into subjects across the curriculum and have  used it to teach
literature, art, science, and social studies as well as  creative writing
in all genres.  The quality of dramatic writing done  by these teachers in
the professional development workshops has  been excellent. Some of them
have seen their work produced in UNM  showcases along with plays written
by graduate and undergraduate  theatre majors.  Their excitement at
discovering their playwriting  ability adds depth and passion to their
work with students.  
</p><p>
Wrinkle Writing has also affected the lives of the students who have
participated.  Those who are shy about putting pen to paper are  often
very happy to get up and improvise dramatic situations, then  write alone
or in groups to capture on paper what they've just  enacted. We treat our
young writers as professionals.  They sign  contracts if we select their
work for production and they see their  writing taken seriously by their
peers, college students and faculty,  teachers, and parents. We give
awards or certificates to all  participants.  Our guest writers also
approach the children as  colleagues and fellow writers.  
</p><p>
The collaboration has had some other unexpected benefits.  It has  opened
up exciting areas for research in the interaction between  creative drama
processes and writing processes.  The knowledge and  expertise of the
participating teachers have expanded the horizons of  the college faculty
and vice versa. (I am integrating writing into my  regular college courses
in creative drama and acting in ways I never  expected!)    The theatre
education and playwriting programs within  the UNM Department of Theatre
and Dance have come closer  together, with more theatre education students
taking playwrit-ing  while more playwriting students are exploring the
opportunities  available in teaching.  Theatre majors are receiving
invaluable  classroom teaching experience guided by excellent teachers.
More  lines of communication are opening up between the Department of
Theatre and Dance and the College of Education. The  intergenerational
nature of the project has had a profound effect on  all of us.  
</p><hr/>
<h4><a href=".\">Back to
Table of Contents of the Fall 1995 Issue of <i>On Common
Ground</i></a>
</h4>
</main>