---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/pubs/A18/prown.html"
---
<main>
<center><h2>
Exploring Art, Artifacts, and Culture in the Institute</h2>
<font size="+1">by Jules David Prown</font>
</center><hr/>
The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute was established in 1978 as a  joint
program of Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools.  A
fundamental principle of the Institute is that the curriculum is
initially generated by the school teachers themselves. Yale faculty  are
then invited to offer seminars in areas of teacher interest.  Individual
teachers propose topics they will develop in seminar as  curriculum units
and teach the following year. In response, Yale  faculty seminar leaders
fine-tune the planned reading and  discussions to fit the interests of the
accepted participants.  Completed units are subsequently published and
made available to  other interested teachers in the school system (and
teachers  elsewhere by request).
<p>
The seminar leaders from the Yale faculty bring greater subject  matter
knowledge and expertise; the school teachers bring much  greater practical
classroom knowledge. The seminars are collegial  undertakings conducted in
an atmosphere of mutual respect. In  working in a collegial way with
school teachers, we Yale professors­ more than seventy five of whom,
mostly senior faculty, have been  involved with the Institute in its
fifteen years of existence­learn  much about the craft we profess,
about what it means to be a  teacher. It is easy to teach Yale
students­give them the right  materials and ask the right questions
and they teach themselves. In  the Institute we become aware of the
extraordinary  accomplishments of dedicated New Haven school teachers who
work  in environments that are often not conducive to learning, and we
learn from their sensitivity and responsiveness to the needs of
individual students. Like all teachers, we learn through teaching.
</p><p>
I have offered three seminars in the Institute, all of which have had  a
similar theoretical and methodological underpinning.1 The method,  in
brief, derives from the concept that all artifacts­that is, all
human-made objects, including works of art­are fragments of  history
that embody the beliefs of the culture that produced them.  They are
things that happened in the past but, unlike other historical  happenings,
continue to exist in the present. They can therefore be  re experienced,
affording a special mode of non-verbal, affective  access to other
cultures and to our  own. Pedagogically, this provides  an opportunity for
making other times and other places, other ways  of life and thought, more
comprehensible to students, including those  who have difficulty absorbing
verbal information, or who are  immediately dismissive of cultures
different from their own. It also  enables young people, including those
who lack verbal or  mathematical skills, to extract information from
things about their  own culture, whether their family, their community, or
their social,  religious, or ethnic heritage. Four out of five school
children in New  Haven are from minority groups, and units on African,
Hispanic,  Pre-Columbian and Native American cultures are usual, along
with  more traditional units on historic Anglo-American culture.
</p><p>
In my seminars, we use close analysis of objects as a means of
understanding culture, not only to absorb factual historical evidence  but
to dig beneath the surface to find unconscious expressions of  cultural
belief. It involves application of a simple methodology.  Teachers from
New Haven elementary, middle, and high schools who  teach Social Studies,
History, Art, English, Spanish, and French  (language teachers of a
cultural/historical bent experimenting with  materials for instruction)
have enrolled in my seminars. The first two  were enttled "Art, Artifacts,
and Material Culture" and "Time  Machines: Artifacts and Culture." The
seminar I gave most recently  on "The Family in Art and Material Culture"
was structured around  the analysis of images of the family and, to a
lesser extent, objects of  everyday life. Emphasis was placed on key
stages of family life­ birth, childhood, marriage, parenthood, aging,
and death. 
</p><p>
With the emphasis on methodology, the seminars seem to have been
particularly useful to teachers in developing <i>practical</i> aspects of
their  teaching lesson plans. Each class meeting focuses on the analysis
of a  single object. In seminar meetings we analyze museum objects, but
the teachers are encouraged in developing units to subject everyday
materials to the same kind of close analysis. Their students in turn  can
do the same thing with pictures in magazines, family snapshots,  or items
of everyday life around them. The museum is used not as a  treasure house
that contains sanctioned objects of beauty and value,  but as a training
ground for learning to extract understanding from  things. This affective
way of learning works for non-literate as well  as literate students, and
offers opportunities for students who may  seem backward to excel through
visual acuity or creativity in  executing projects in the curriculum unit. 
</p><p>
Units developed in the material culture seminars promise an  extraordinary
range and variety of classroom experiences.  They  have included "The
Native American:  Through the Eyes of His Mask  with a Special Focus on
the Indians of Connecticut"; "Comic Books:   Superheroes/heroines,
Domestic Scenes, and Animal Images"; "New  Haven:  Its Ships and Its
Trades, 1800-1920"; "Totem Poles of the  North American Northwest Coast
Indians"; "Mexican Culture Taught  Through the Aztec Calendar"; "Body
Exterior­The Language of  Contemporary Fashion"; "Toys Are Us";
"Cajun Music:  The Voice of  the Cajun Family"; "Family Life among the
Ashanti of West Africa";  "The Heritage and Culture of Puerto Ricans";
"The Inuit Family:  A  Study of its History, Beliefs, and Images"; and
"New Haven Families:   Artifacts and Attitudes, 1770s to 1890s." Through
the use of objects  and a systematic method of object analysis, such units
can stimulate  and direct students' ability to use their senses,
especially their  abilities to see; to overcome inhibitions and respond
emotionally; to  reflect on the meaning of their sensory and emotional
experiences; to  express themselves orally and in writing with clarity and
precision;  to make value judgments and decisions. The curriculum units
are  intended to convert the theory of the seminar into the practice of
the  New Haven classroom.
</p><hr/>
<h4><a href=".\">Back to
Table of Contents of the Fall 1995 Issue of <i>On Common
Ground</i></a>
</h4>
</main>