---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1985/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1985/1/85.01.06.x.html">85.01.06</a> <br/> This unit employs theater games and exercises, among other innovative techniques, to help students gain an appreciation of poetry. Poets emphasized include Sophocles, Shakespeare, Pound, and Alice Walker, author of <i>The</i> <i>Color</i> Purple. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/1/85.01.07.x.html">85.01.07</a> <br/> Students experience a number of writing activities in this unit which compares the poetry of three cultures: African American, Spanish American, and European American. Emphasis is placed on understanding the cultural backgrounds of the poets. Very specific lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/2/85.02.02.x.html">85.02.02</a> <br/> A contrast of how the traditional family unit is challenged in two popular musicals, <i>Fiddler</i> <i>on</i> <i>the</i> <i>Roof</i> and <i>West</i> <i>Side</i> Story, this unit covers ten weeks and is filled with numerous dramatic activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/3/85.03.02.x.html">85.03.02</a> <br/> Using films and their corresponding novels, this unit focuses on the theme of "Becoming an Adult." Touches on European American, African American, and Puerto Rican concerns. Many discussion questions and value clarification activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/3/85.03.03.x.html">85.03.03</a> <br/> This unit has three objectives: to expose students to autobiography as a genre, to study Maya Angelou's autobiographical writings, and to focus on figurative language. Contains seven different autobiographical writing projects. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.01.x.html">85.04.01</a> <br/> With an emphasis on the use of Pre-Columbian and Early Colonial Drama, this unit uses drama to improve written and oral skills. <br/> Students who use English as a second language will benefit form this unit's integrated language arts focus. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.02.x.html">85.04.02</a> <br/> This unit provides an opportunity for students to study important Latin American literary figures. The short stories of Horacio Quiroga are a central focus. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.03.x.html">85.04.03</a> <br/> Famous Hispanics in literary history of Latin America are recognized in this unit with emphasis on Caribbean writers. Based on models studied, the students will develop their own methods of research and writing. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.04.x.html">85.04.04</a> <br/> This unit examines the influence of geography upon a regions culture. Students will gain rich knowledge in the use of topographical maps, as well as learning about ethnic groups that have migrated to the West Indies and surrounding islands. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.05.x.html">85.04.05</a> <br/> The work of Diego Rivera is used to study the history of Mexico. Murals and other art work will be analyzed to reveal information about Rivera's life. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/4/85.04.06.x.html">85.04.06</a> <br/> This unit examines the causes of various slave revolts in Caribbean America with emphasis on the Haitian Revolution of 1791-1804. It provides an extensive vocabulary list that will aid in understanding colonial society during slavery. Suggestions on role playing and debate on the advisability of slave revolt in Haiti provide interesting activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/5/85.05.01.x.html">85.05.01</a> <br/> This unit focuses on emancipators who spoke about abolishing slavery, those who staged rebellions, and those who escaped slavery. Attempts to give students a more realistic picture of slavery in the context of American history. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/5/85.05.02.x.html">85.05.02</a> <br/> Through the use of slave narratives, students will be exposed to the day to day experiences of slaves in the South. Students will come away with a more realistic picture of slave life in the United States. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/5/85.05.04.x.html">85.05.04</a> <br/> By examining the successes of New Haven natives, Constance Baker Motley, Adam Clayton Powell, and Raymond St. Jacques, this unit also provides students with a picture of African American life in the city during the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/6/85.06.01.x.html">85.06.01</a> <br/> Designed for art classes, the main focus of this unit is to transfer the object analysis of the Northwest Indian totem pole to a similar object analysis by students of their own culture. Students will develop their own “city” totems. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/6/85.06.02.x.html">85.06.02</a> <br/> The unit uses a study of the Aztec calendar to add a different perspective to the standard Spanish class curriculum. Includes six designs and a detailed chart of the eighteen months of the calendar and their respective ceremonies. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/6/85.06.06.x.html">85.06.06</a> <br/> By studying and making West African ceremonial masks, this unit attempts to examine culture, art, and the relationship between them. Contains background information and interesting hands-on art lessons. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/6/85.06.07.x.html">85.06.07</a> <br/> This unit studies Egyptian culture through an analysis of Egyptian tomb art. Uses object analysis and museum trips to arouse interest. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1985/6/85.06.09.x.html">85.06.09</a> <br/> In order to overcome the anxieties pupils often express when studying early African art, this unit uses a dialogue approach (example included) to create an imaginary African culture. Contains some background information. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>