---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: Teaching Teachers: A Faculty View of The New Haven Teachers Institute"
path: "/pubs/A4/brodhead.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">Teaching Teachers: A Faculty View<br/>
of The New Haven Teachers Institute</h2>
<p align="CENTER"><big>by Richard H. Brodhead</big></p>
<p>The New Haven Teachers Institute might be described as a program 
in which two groups having a great deal in common--the faculties of Yale 
University and of New Haven's public high and middle schools--come together 
to discover and build on their common interests. Whether they teach older 
or younger students, in public or private institutions, such a description 
might continue, all of the participants of the Institute are members of one 
profession; and whether they teach at the most advanced or the most 
elementary levels, they all work in the same disciplines, and so inevitably 
share assumptions and commitments. What could be more natural than for them 
to pool their thinking?</p>
<p>Alternatively, the New Haven Teachers Institute might be described 
as a program in which two groups having next to nothing in common--the 
faculties of Yale University and of New Haven's public high and middle 
schools--conspire to invent interests that they might be said to share. The 
work these groups do, this account would emphasize, might go by the same 
name, but in fact the terms on which they practice their profession put 
deep gulfs between them. One is used to teaching the extremely privileged, 
the other, commonly, the extremely unprivileged; one assumes students 
already highly prepared, the other students who need to be prepared; one 
associates its discipline with recent elaborations of specialized 
knowledge, the other with traditional and basic skills; and of course a 
host of other differences follow from these. When these groups come 
together, this account would conclude, it is less likely to be because they 
feel united in their labors than because they are troubled by the lack of 
such a unity. And if they assume in advance that they have large areas of 
common ground, they are likely to be unpleasantly surprised.</p>
<p>The anomaly of the Teachers Institute--but also, I think, the reason why 
it works--is that both of these contradictory descriptions fit it equally 
well. Half of the paradox of the Institute is that when its participants 
approach each other expecting to find a community of experience, they find, 
instead, how different their work-lives are. In my own case, while I 
certainly knew in a general way that the classes the teachers in my seminar 
taught were quite unlike my own, I was still constantly surprised by the 
particulars of their educational situations, and by the reminders they 
offered that our everyday worlds were worlds apart. Most of my teachers, I 
learned, locked their classrooms while teaching; where I teach, of course, 
control of students' physical behavior is so perfected as to be invisible. 
I sometimes find college freshmen immature in their literary responses; 
looking at one teacher's photos of his sixth graders reminded me that his 
audience was immature in a much more fundamental sense. I am sure I am not 
the only Institute instructor who found that the more I learned about who 
and what and where and how my teachers taught, the more out of place I 
felt. What did I, of all people, know about the situations these teachers 
faced day? after day And what possible application could what I did with my 
students have in scenes so utterly remote?</p>
<p>Anxieties of this sort are built into the role of an instructor in the 
Institute; and no doubt our teacher-students have their own corresponding 
versions of these anxieties. What helps alleviate them is that the other 
half of the Institute's paradox is also true: namely, that when its 
participants approach each other expecting to be irrevocably divided, they 
are always discovering that there is, after all, real community between 
them--that their professions (in the sense of both what they do and what 
they believe in) are in fact not unrelated; and that the other's work might 
strengthen his own.</p>
<p>The Institute builds on the simultaneous oneness and difference of its 
constituent halves in the way it organizes their work together. The 
Institute operates through a set of seminars, each led by a Yale professor 
and containing eight to twelve New Haven teachers, in which, after 
exploring a subject of mutual interest, the teachers prepare a detailed 
plan for a curriculum unit growing out of that subject, to be taught in 
their classes the next year. The Institute aims to strengthen public 
education, in other words, not by acting on it in an immediate way--by 
providing funds, for instance, or inserting outside experts directly into 
the teaching process--but by helping its teachers form more thoughtful and 
imaginative ideas of how education can be designed. The faculty leader of 
the seminar makes no pretense to know how, exactly, the students at the far 
end of the process ought to be taught; but he does pretend to know, and in 
an especially expert way, something that might enrich and enliven the 
educational program that is offered to them. In the seminar he invites his 
teacher-students into some portion of his expertise, then asks them to 
figure out how they can adapt what they learn there to the needs and uses 
of their classes.</p>
<p>To say this is to suggest that the role of the faculty in the Teachers 
Institute is a peculiar one. On the one hand, he must be the instructor of 
his seminar. To bring its members to the point where they can think their 
subjects and protocols through in a genuinely new way, he must be willing 
really to teach them: to lead them to new materials, and above all to open 
out new frames of understanding for them. But on the other hand, he must 
also not be the instructor in any usual sense. His goal, here, is less to 
teach his students than to enable their teaching of their students. They 
are not in his seminar to learn his subject, but to remake it into their 
subject. In this sense his real function is not that of expert or authority 
but that of co-collaborator, working, with his high- and middle-school 
counterparts, to reinvent the terms on which their shared field can be 
communicated to others.</p>
<p>Teaching one's usual subject in a context where teaching has such 
unusual goals is a stiff challenge. Performing the role I have just 
outlined requires one to construct kinds of courses almost by definition 
radically unlike anything one has taught before. And even when the outlines 
of the course turn out to be well-drawn, the work, session by session and 
exchange by exchange, of making the seminar serve these quite unfamiliar 
ends requires large measures of patience, flexibility, and willingness to 
fail and try again.</p>
<p>The challenge of having constantly to rework the usual terms in which 
one conceives and presents one's field is, I would argue, the greatest 
benefit that a program like the Institute offers its faculty participants. 
To show how it operates, I might tell a little about my own experience. 
When I was asked to teach in the Institute for last summer, I had the (at 
this point very vague) idea that I might offer a seminar on autobiography. 
The topic seemed plausible enough. Autobiography was a subject of 
sufficient generality, I guessed, that it might hook up equally well with 
the work of teachers at many different grade and aptitude levels. It 
seemed, as well, a kind of writing that might have very general appeal, one 
that did not assume a pre-commitment to "literature" unlikely to be found 
in early grades or inner-city schools. I had just been teaching a series of 
autobiographies in a seminar at Yale, so that the subject was of fresh 
interest to me. And I had found in that class that autobiography offered an 
especially effective way of demonstrating the nature and action of 
style--another reason why it might be useful to teachers trying to promote 
awareness of language and its powers.</p>
<p>These were the grounds on which I first proposed my course. But 
significantly, thinking of this course as a project for the Institute made 
it take some further turns. It was clear that in this context I could not 
expect the primary interest in the internal play of complex literary texts 
that I would take for granted in a college literature class--the claim for 
autobiography's interest would have to be framed in very different terms. 
Further, if the seminar was to speak to the central problems its 
participants faced as teachers, it could not deal with literature alone, 
but would also have to address the issue of student writing. In face of 
these necessities my course gradually re-fashioned itself--most crucially, 
by coming to identify autobiography not with a few remarkable books but 
with a primary human impulse, the impulse that makes us, in addition to 
living our life, also have to tell it and re-tell it: to record it, to 
recount it, in a hundred familiar ways to bring it to expression. Conceived 
in this way, any kind of text--a formal, printed life, but equally, say, a 
scrapbook; the stories of illustrious men, but equally those of students 
themselves--could become a revealing object for the study of autobiography. 
And conceived in this way, autobiography could be presented to students as 
an expressive art they were in many ways masters of--such that a program of 
student writing built out of autobiography could make writing not some 
alien, unmasterable skill designed endlessly to expose their incompetence, 
but part of their existing competence, a power already in their power. As 
finally evolved my seminar's idea was to stimulate thought on the reading 
and writing of autobiography, with reading and writing understood not as 
separate but as means to one another: to produce courses, thus, in which 
doing their own autobiographical writing would make students aware of the 
problems the authors they read were facing in their writing; and in which 
seeing how these authors solved their problems would enrich the store of 
expressive means at the student's disposal.</p>
<p>This was the state my conception had reached by the time the seminar 
began meeting, in the spring. But of course once it met, it was clear that 
many further adjustments would have to be made. One thing the first meeting 
revealed was simply that the actual participants in the seminar were much 
more diverse than I had imagined. They were diverse in every way, but most 
crucially in their prior understanding of the subject: one of my teachers 
thought that autobiographies were written mainly to make money; another 
clearly knew much more about contemporary American ethnic autobiography 
than I did. Just as significantly they differed in the audience their work 
would be directed back toward: some of my teachers taught high school 
seniors, others sixth graders; one had accelerated sections, several 
remedial ones; some taught English, as I had expected, but one taught it as 
a second language; and two taught mainly history, and one taught only 
chemistry.</p>
<p>Another problem that quickly came clear--not that it was completely 
unforeseen--was that my teachers and I lived in very different literary 
universes. The works that occurred to me as standard examples of 
autobiography were largely unknown to them, and I was often equally 
ignorant of theirs. I had not planned, of course, to rely on obviously 
oversophisticated texts--<i>The Education of Henry Adams</i>, for instance, 
or <i>The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas</i> (but what does autobiography 
mean, to a professor of American literature, if it does not mean works like 
those?). But even the works I thought would be more widely teachable often 
turned out to be, from their point of view, unsuitable for use with their 
classes. How our study could be focused became as big a problem as how our 
interests could be made compatible.</p>
<p>But the greatest difficulty was that none of us knew how to do the 
different <i>kind </i>of course that an Institute seminar embodied. We all 
knew how to be either the teacher or the student; how to be 
co-collaborators was more of a mystery. I certainly knew how to present a 
subject to a class; making a class re-imagine how a subject could be 
presented was a different proposition. Let's not study books as if they 
were independently interesting, I was saying, but only as they could help 
make students aware of and adept at expression in the most general sense; 
but of course all my acquired instincts as a teacher went in exactly the 
opposite way.</p>
<p>I will not pretend that all of these difficulties were ever overcome. 
But I will say that they were overcome much more successfully than I 
initially expected. And further, the way in which they were resolved showed 
the practicability of the Institute's ideal of collaborative co-creation. 
In our discussions my teachers and I could see at once that no single texts 
we could locate would be teachable in all (or even in very many) of our 
classes. But we could also see that aspects or problems in autobiography 
could be identified that all of us could profit from investigating, and 
that each of us could then relate to his teaching in his own way. Our 
weekly sessions, then, were organized around a series of questions about 
autobiography, some mine, some theirs, some genuinely mutual inventions: 
the question of voice in autobiography--how individualized expression is 
achieved in language, how autobiography's voice both reflects and creates 
the individual identity of the living autobiographical subject; the 
question of autobiography's history--how and why the self's record of 
itself has changed through time; the question of sincerity--how 
autobiography can recover and record authentically felt experience, whether 
it need reflect such experience or can invent the life it purports to 
record; the question of selection--what could be put into or left out of an 
autobiographical account, what different images and knowledge of the self 
different ways of selecting its history might create; and so on.</p>
<p>For each week's session we would read written selections that focused 
the issue at hand in a particularly illuminating way. These assignments 
were sometimes my constructions, sometimes my teachers' ideas--but in many 
of the most successful cases they were a combination of the two. I wanted 
to hold two sessions first on autobiography's tendency to organize 
life-history around moments of crisis, then on what happens when sheer 
uneventful everydayness is made into autobiography's focus. I had the idea 
that this contrast could be pointed up by comparing James Baldwin's "Notes 
of a Native Son," a piece in which crisis is piled on crisis--a father's 
death in a historic race riot, an initiatory birthday on a crisis of 
belief--until the texture of ordinary life all but disappears, with 
selections from Maya Angelou's <i>I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings</i>, in 
which potential crisis is always being defused by the pleasurable memory of 
mundane detail. These texts served to make my point well enough, but the 
point was both reinforced and marvelously expanded by the works by students 
added to our assignment: first a sheaf of their own students' essays, full 
of remembered hurricanes, arrests of parents, and deaths of beloved 
pets--perfect proof of how various crisis can be and how natural it is for 
us to arrange our told lives around them; and second, examples from their 
own reading of literature of the everyday--several of which, including an 
unforgettable passage from Laura Basse's <i>An Uncertain Memory</i> (a book 
I had never heard of), turned out to illustrate this idea far better than 
the work I had chosen.</p>
<p>Having talked about our readings in such a way as to bring a general 
problem in autobiography to our own fuller awareness, we would then try to 
reverse ourselves, and to consider how what we had been discussing could be 
made available to our students, and how it could lead to a program of 
student writing. This was the part of our work to which the teachers had 
the most brilliant contributions to make. I will not pretend that my 
co-workers were all pedagogical geniuses. Nevertheless when it came to 
thinking up ways in which a more or less abstract idea could be translated 
into a program of exercises, they exhibited a freewheeling improvisational 
inventiveness that I found quite remarkable, and from which college 
composition teachers (myself included) had much to learn. The best of their 
ideas--which they freely borrowed from each other--not only set interesting 
challenges for their students, but also made their writing not ancillary to 
learning but a central means through which learning could take place. One 
week I had them read selections from Thomas Shepard's <i>Autobiography, 
</i>Benjamin Franklin's <i>Autobiography, </i>Wordworth's <i>The 
Prelude</i>, and Frederick Douglass's <i>Narrative </i>as representative of 
different ways in which the self pictures and understands itself in 
different cultural and historical situations. How, I then asked, could you 
get this idea across to your students? One answered: "You could have them 
come to class dressed up in the costumes of a different period." Another: 
"Not that; then they'll think the difference is just one of costume. Tell 
them they have to talk the way they would have at that time." And another: 
"Or have them tell what some part of their day would have been like in 
different historical circumstances." And another: "Or have them take one of 
these readings and then write an account of something that has happened to 
themselves, but using, say, Shepard's way of feeling and describing it; 
then rewrite some event in Shepard's narrative, retelling it as they would 
have experienced it." In an exercise like this last the act of writing 
might give a student a feeling for the historicality of experience that he 
would be unlikely to get from reading and discussion alone. But I falsely 
isolate it as an example: the worth of such a dialogue lies less in any set 
assignments it might produce than in the way it re-enlivens everyone's 
ideas of what they could ask their students to do.</p>
<p>The actual good that a seminar of this sort will achieve, either for the 
teachers who take it or for the students they then return to teach, is not 
easily measured. It is easy to dream up wonderful benefits that 
participation in the Yale-New Haven Teachers institute might yield--a 
teacher corps rededicated to its work and refreshed in its sense of what 
that work is really about; in consequence, a student body for whom the 
elements of knowledge are made accessible, not remote, and lively, not 
deadly, through their education. Whether any of this is so is, of course, 
not in my power to say. But I can say, from my own case, what benefits the 
Institute yields on the faculty side. When I signed on with the Institute I 
expected that the pleasures it would yield would be largely those of the 
worthy cause--the mild joy of knowing that, with only minor personal 
inconvenience, one had made a contribution to the public good. But I am not 
the only participant I know who felt, upon completing the Institute, that 
the principal good I had done was to myself.</p>
<p>It might be explained this way. To be a professor of the humanities is 
to assert at least implicitly that, however narrowly it is organized in 
one's daily practice, the work one is engaged in is of general human 
applicability, and its study of general human value. But in the world of 
the university this assertion is neither very seriously challenged nor very 
easily confirmed. The claims of the humanities are already granted 
there--but granted, we know, as one of the assumptions shared by the 
well-educated, the very assumptions that set them apart from those outside 
the wall. Teaching in a program like the Institute takes this profession 
out of its usual supportive confine and challenges it to re-establish its 
validity. In doing so it subjects this profession to strenuous testing: 
makes it have to discover what it is in its work that can claim to be of 
really general significance, and how it can establish that significance to 
the whole audience it purports to address. The strain of this situation is 
genuinely painful, but even a very incomplete success in it yields a 
correspondingly great pleasure; the pleasure of finding that what is most 
important to us can in fact be made important to others--and not just the 
others who agree with us already, but those who have the least reason to 
share our assumptions in advance.</p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>