---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: Introduction"
path: "/pubs/A4/intro.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">Introduction</h2>
<p>In February 1983 the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute 
cosponsored with the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching 
and the Council of Chief State School Officers a national conference at 
Yale University on the role higher education can and must play in 
strengthening teaching in American schools. The present volume was prepared 
for distribution initially to the Chief State School Officers, college and 
university presidents and chancellors, and government and foundation 
officials who were invited to attend the conference.</p>
<p>As part of our audience, we also had in mind colleagues in other 
school systems and at other colleges and universities who may wish to learn 
more about our Teachers Institute so that they might consider establishing 
similar joint programs to enhance secondary education in their own 
communities. We are therefore delighted that the College Board, which since 
1900 has fostered the academic connections between schools and colleges, is 
making this volume so widely available in the present edition. Because the 
Board's own membership includes both schools and colleges across the 
country--and because of its dedication to both excellence in and access to 
education at all levels--we believe the College Board is an especially 
appropriate organization to republish and distribute this report on our 
collaborative program in New Haven.</p>
<p>University-school cooperation has recently received considerable 
attention as an important means of addressing the problems of our secondary 
schools and, particularly, what some have termed a "crisis" in teaching in 
our schools. In December 1982 Fred M. Hechinger reported in the <i>New York 
Times</i> on "the reversal of a 20-year breach between higher education and 
the schools." The reasons for the present concern about teaching in our 
schools are increasingly familiar: issues of prestige, power, pay, and 
preparation for teachers. Based upon my experience with the Yale-New Haven 
Teachers Institute, I believe the means for addressing some, though not 
all, of these problems are in our hands and within our power. 
School-college collaboration, though certainly not a panacea for all that 
afflicts our schools, can improve our schools.</p>
<p>New Haven teachers and University faculty members have gained a great 
deal from working together as colleagues in our Institute. That is why Yale 
sponsored the 1983 conference which was entitled "Excellence in Teaching: A 
Common Goal." By coming to New Haven from thirty-eight states, American 
Samoa, the Northern Mariannas, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the 
participants made this a national meeting of leaders in elementary and 
secondary and higher education which was almost without precedent.</p>
<p>The conference provided a convincing affirmation of the joint mission of 
higher education and our schools, and a reminder of the fundamental 
connection between education at all levels and the national interest. Four 
examples of school-college collaboration, including our Teachers Institute, 
were presented as case studies, and the Carnegie Foundation prepared for 
release at the conference a Special Report, <i>School and College: 
Partnerships in Education </i>, that surveys these and other projects 
across the country. The point was not that we wish to franchise any one of 
these projects; rather, as New York Commissioner of Education Gordon Ambach 
said, that "these kinds of effective practices must be made much more 
widespread and systematic in their application."</p>
<p>The themes in the discussion at the national conference have become more 
widely accepted; they provide a context for describing the approach of our 
Teachers Institute. The conference assumed that the quality of the 
educational process depends, more than anything else, on teaching. We 
shared a concern for attracting, preparing, and retaining the very best of 
our young people in this profession, on the one hand, and on the other a 
concern for the morale, rewards, and further preparation for teachers now 
in the system.</p>
<p>There was no dissenting voice on the question of pay, on the point that 
individuals in the teaching profession ought to be paid on a level that 
recognizes their importance to our society. But the conference concentrated 
on what the school and institution representatives who were there could 
themselves do.</p>
<p>All realized that later in this decade we face potential shortages of 
qualified teachers, and not only in the sciences and mathematics. But the 
immediate task, most agreed, is to strengthen the teaching of individuals 
already in the profession. Assisting our present teachers is at least as 
pressing as recruiting for the future. Here the case studies demonstrated 
that important gains can be made through partnerships, if one clearly 
defines and sticks with manageable goals. As Yale President A. Bartlett 
Giamatti observed, "one cannot become overwhelmed or paralyzed by the fact 
that one is not solving all the problems of American education or American 
culture, all of which are there, but which the educational process will 
solve in the longer term, if it is healthy every step along the way."</p>
<p>The nature of the partnership we seek bears directly on the question of 
the power of teachers. As President Norman C. Francis of Xavier University 
said, the partnership must not be a "big brother-little brother 
relationship." It must be a genuine, coequal relationship. University 
faculty and school teachers must work together as colleagues.</p>
<p>Florida Chancellor Barbara Newell described the main work of the 
partnership: "We must make sure that all within the educational system 
share" in the rapidly changing fields of human knowledge, so that "the 
partnership must be far broader than Schools of Education. It must cover 
the entire university community."</p>
<p>At the conference, then, leaders in education from across the country 
affirmed that the problems and the missions of our schools and colleges are 
fundamentally intertwined, and that, acting out of that conviction, there 
are important and practical things that together we in education can do to 
make this country stronger and better. Our Teachers Institute is founded 
upon that belief. It is founded upon a recognition of mutual interest 
between city and college, between school and college, that must become more 
frequent if as a nation we are to improve the education of our young 
people.</p>
<p>The interplay of our schools and colleges has, of course, been a 
recurring theme in the history of American education. During the rise of 
universal secondary education and the growth of higher education in 
America, colleges have had a vested interest in the prior education of 
their students. Higher education has served to shape secondary school 
curricula through admissions requirements, and college faculty have written 
curricula and textbooks for use directly in schools. Schools have sought to 
know the content of college courses so that they might prepare their 
students for college studies. Some colleges have muted the distinction 
between secondary and higher education by the early enrollment of high 
school students in college offerings, sometimes for credit, either on 
campus or in schools. Probably most important, higher education has 
provided the initial preparation, and often continuing education, for the 
individuals who teach in our schools.</p>
<p>Over the past century some of the most influential analysts of our 
schools have emphasized the continuing engagement of teachers with the 
subjects they teach. In a series of widely-read essays published in 1892, 
Joseph M. Rice argued that "teachers must constantly endeavor to grow both 
in professional and in general intellectual strength." Having observed 
schools in thirty-six cities, Rice concluded, "by far the most progress has 
been made in those cities where the teachers themselves are the most 
earnest students. . . . [I]t is, after all, the teacher that makes the 
school." That same year, under President Charles W. Eliot, Harvard 
University instituted free courses for Cambridge teachers in the sciences. 
The following year writing for the Committee of Ten, Eliot asserted that 
the changes the Committee recommended depended on teachers more highly 
trained during their initial preparation and while in service. The Carnegie 
Report of 1920 on <i>The Professional Preparation of Teachers</i> spoke of 
the importance of "regular periods of uninterrupted study" for teachers 
because "the present vitality of the school is directly involved." In 1945 
the authors of the Harvard Report, <i>General Education in a Free 
Society,</i> stated that "there is no educational reform so important as 
the improvement of teaching," and that the greatest of the schools' needs 
was "a more rounded, longer, more continuing education of teachers." In 
1963 James B. Conant's <i>The Education of American Teachers</i> 
recommended especially continuing study and in-service education for 
teachers. Most recently, in the Carnegie Report on <i>High School</i> 
Ernest L. Boyer called for greater emphasis on subject matter in the 
initial preparation of the teacher, and for "a planned continuing education 
program . . . [as] part of every teacher's professional life." As Boyer 
later wrote in commenting on the numerous education studies and reports 
issued in 1983, "We are beginning to see that whatever is wrong with 
America's schools cannot be fixed without the help of those teachers 
already in the classrooms. Most of them will be there for years to come, 
and teachers must be viewed as part of the solution, not as part of the 
problem."</p>
<p>National demographic trends, even though they obscure significant state 
and regional differences, demonstrate the particular importance of Boyer's 
observation for the 1980s. The decline in enrollment in public secondary 
schools, which began in the 1970s, will continue into the early 1990s. 
While the reduced demand for teachers resulting from falling enrollment was 
initially offset by an improved ratio of teachers to students, during the 
1980s this ratio will improve at a much slower rate. The proportion of 
teachers who leave the profession each year, which dropped to 6 percent in 
1973, will continue at this lower level. The total number of secondary 
school teachers will therefore continue to decline through the 1980s; the 
average annual demand for these teachers will be 30 percent less than in 
the 1970s. New college graduates, who represented 9 percent of all school 
teachers in 1971, constituted only 2 percent of teachers in 1982.<sup><a href="#note_1">*</a></sup> <a name="text_1">In 
short, the secondary education of a generation of the nation's young people 
will be mainly in the hands of individuals presently teaching. To improve 
secondary education in the 1980s we must therefore strengthen the teaching 
of those individuals already in, and now entering, the profession. Since 
its inception, that has been the purpose of the Yale-New Haven Teachers 
Institute.</a></p><a name="text_1">
<p>Evaluations of the Institute, some of which are included in the 
Appendix, document that such collaborative programs can assist our schools 
in specific ways. A study of the program in 1982 showed that the Institute 
has significantly increased teachers' knowledge of their disciplines, 
raised their morale, heightened their expectations of their students' 
ability to learn, and that it has, in turn, improved student learning. 
Consistent with a central aim of the program, the materials teachers 
develop serve all students, not only those most successful in school. In 
light of the well-publicized frustrations of the teaching profession, it is 
especially heartening that so many teachers wish to participate on a 
recurring basis in so demanding a program, and that about half of the 
participating teachers report that the Institute contributed to their 
decision to continue teaching in our community's public schools.</p>
<p>Theodore R. Sizer performed the most recent evaluation of our program; 
he wrote in his report:</p>
<blockquote>I share the view of my predecessor "visitors" that yours is a 
remarkable program, for its clear and useful focus, for its simplicity 
and--above all else--for the atmosphere of constructive collegiality 
between Yale and New Haven teachers that has been created. . . . The 
arguments for the current scale are powerful. All too few school "reform" 
efforts get the scale right; almost universally they are too ambitious. The 
Institute's work now reaches virtually every New Haven public middle or 
high school student. Over a third of the city's teachers have been directly 
involved, and more wish to join. A significant number will continue to stay 
involved, enjoying "intellectual renewal" as well as "curriculum 
development," as the National Commission on the Humanities expressed it. 
Such renewal does not come quickly. It benefits from sustained contact, 
from supportive conditions, from simmering. The Institute provides such 
conditions for a large enough number of New Haven's teachers to make a 
significant, if subtle, difference over time. By remaining small, focused 
and uncomplicated, the Institute will serve its purpose admirably.</blockquote>
<p>Yet, however pleased we are with this kind of commentary, we also 
acknowledge the skepticism we have sometimes faced while developing the 
Institute. Some critics have asserted that most teachers already know their 
subjects sufficiently well; that, in any event, the way a field is studied 
and taught in a university has little bearing on earlier levels; that to 
improve our schools we must first improve the conditions for teaching; and 
that, until this occurs, no amount of curriculum and staff development will 
make any difference. Besides, as we are sometimes asked by visitors from 
other schools and colleges, why would university faculty members who are 
leading scholars in their fields even be interested in working with 
secondary school teachers; given the distance between university and school 
classes, what could they possibly offer?</p>
<p>The chapters that follow address these questions, among others. Yale 
faculty members who have led Institute seminars talk about how they have 
approached the experience and have themselves gained from it. School 
teachers tell how they have drawn on these seminars to develop materials 
and strategies for their own classes. The purpose of this volume is to make 
concrete the genuinely collaborative experience of university and school 
teachers in our Institute. It is not exhaustive: Only six of the 
thirty-three Yale faculty members who have led Institute seminars wrote 
essays for this volume. Of the more than 380 curriculum units teachers 
prepared between 1978 and 1984, only four have been adapted for inclusion 
here. These chapters illustrate, but not in any comprehensive way, the 
range of subjects for seminars and teachers' work.</p>
<p>The first essay addresses the concept and, briefly, the history of the 
Teachers Institute. I think it important to speak of the principles on 
which the program is founded, not of all the administrative detail we in 
New Haven have found advantageous. What we offer is not a blueprint to be 
followed in detail in building a similar program elsewhere; rather, we 
advance the underlying philosophy and resulting variety of our own 
experience.</p>
<p>Finally, to take a larger view of teaching in America, our experience 
reveals the sharp contrasts between teaching in school and teaching in 
college. There are vast differences in the prestige attributed to teachers 
at each level; the power of teachers as compared to administration within 
each setting; the school and college teacher's relation to his or her 
field, whether the teacher is considered also a contributor to the 
knowledge of a subject; how well it is thought a subject must be known to 
be taught competently at each level; and the breadth of subject matter 
perceived as masterable by teachers and manageable by students in school 
and college. By assigning greater prestige and power to school teaching and 
by engaging teachers in study and writing about their disciplines, the 
Teachers Institute implicitly questions whether teaching in school and 
teaching in college should be regarded as so very different. As Michael 
Cooke suggests in his essay in this volume, in the Teachers Institute we 
view the different educational levels and institutions in this country not 
as discrete and separable compartments, but as parts of a whole educational 
process, for teacher and student alike. Continuing study and writing about 
a subject benefit school teachers no less than their university colleagues. 
In both cases, their students are the ultimate beneficiaries. From the 
Institute we have learned that there not only should, but also can, be more 
common ground for teaching in America: Teachers in secondary and higher 
education hold in common the centrality of their subjects in the education 
of our young people.</p>
<p align="RIGHT">James R. Vivian</p>
<p align="RIGHT"><i>New Haven</i><br/>
<i>June 1984</i></p>
<hr/>
</a><a name="note_1">
<p><sup>*</sup> For a discussion of state and regional differences, see C. Emily 
Feistritzer, <i>The Condition of Teaching, A State by State Analysis</i> 
(Princeton, New Jersey: The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching, l983). For further information on national trends, see especially 
<i>Status of the American Public School Teacher l980-8l</i> (National Education 
Association Research, l982); and the following publications of the National 
Center for Education Statistics: <i>Projections of Education Statistics to 
l990-9l</i>; <i>The Condition of Education, l983 Edition</i>; <i>The Condition of 
Education, l984</i>.</p>
</a><p><a name="note_1"><small>[ </small></a><small><a href="#text_1">Back to text</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>