---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: An Evaluation of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute"
path: "/pubs/A4/kellogg.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">An Evaluation of the Yale-New Haven<br/>
Teachers Institute</h2>
<p align="CENTER"><big>by Robert Kellogg</big></p>
<p>Yale University and the public schools of New Haven exist at 
opposite ends of the spectrum of education in America. As institutions, 
they have in common their physical proximity but only the very broadest of 
educational goals. Their simultaneous closeness and remoteness makes 
fruitful cooperation between them plausible and yet supremely challenging. 
On my visit to the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute on July 7-10, 1980, I 
was impressed not only by the degree to which difficulty can be overcome 
but also by the significance of this experiment for American education at 
large.</p>
<p>Such disparity in educational missions and resources as are 
represented by Yale and the New Haven schools is not unique; it is a 
commonplace in this country, one that, on the other hand, goes against our 
grain as a nation. There are pragmatic grounds as well for believing that 
the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, and mechanisms like it, must become 
more widespread. My first impression of the Teachers Institute, therefore, 
was that it is important, not just to Yale and to the city of New Haven, 
but to all of us.</p>
<p>The Institute is ingeniously conceived and administered, with the 
knowledgeable support, intellectually and financially, of the 
administrations of both the schools and the University. The principal 
impression this care and ingenuity makes on the visitor is that it has left 
the heart of the Institute free to flourish: the intellectual and 
pedagogical exchange between the two faculties.</p>
<p>New Haven's schools are no exception to the general rule in public 
secondary education that a hierarchy of officers--department chair people, 
principals, curriculum supervisors, and the superintendent's 
office--formulate the educational goals and methods of the schools more 
explicitly and in more detail than is customary in higher education, where 
goals and teaching methods are derived more implicitly, within each 
discipline, by custom and collegiality, in an atmosphere of perceived 
intellectual freedom. In addition to its strictly academic function, but in 
many respects indistinguishable from it, the administrative structure of 
public schools also serves a conspicuous "managerial" function, which, 
also, has no exact counterpart in higher education, where, in general, 
university management is carried out and student services are provided by a 
nonacademic staff.</p>
<p>That Yale does not have a school or a department of Education is in this 
instance a blessing. Without an intermediary buffer, softening, 
exaggerating, or explaining away the contrast of intellectual milieu 
between secondary education and higher education, the two groups of 
teachers (the Institute Fellows and the Yale faculty) are free to explore 
for themselves the extent to which they share values and assumptions about 
their subject and its role in the development of children's minds and 
characters.</p>
<p>In order that the "managerial" aspect of the school administration not 
be reflected in the operation of the Institute, a small group of teachers, 
the Institute Coordinators, serves to "represent" both the schools in the 
Institute and the Institute in the schools. The conception is ingenious, 
and the individuals who serve as Coordinators are, more than any other 
single element, crucial to the Institute's successful operation. The 
Coordinators I met were thoughtful and intelligent men and women who 
understood the purpose of the Institute and were effective representatives 
of the two institutions of which they were members. They were especially 
committed to a central feature of the Institute: an educational experience 
that does not distinguish between the personal growth of the Fellows and 
their growth as teachers.</p>
<p>For some members of the Institute, however, this unresolved duality of 
roles played by the Fellows is a source of frustration. Since it is clearly 
intentional in the conception of the Institute, and not a fault, I will 
point out where some lines of stress were apparent to me. The intellectual 
"occasion" to which the program of the Institute points in the experience 
of each Fellow is the writing and editing of a curricular unit of 
instruction. The Yale faculty prepare and conduct seminars in their 
disciplines, where the Fellows have many of the responsibilities of 
ordinary students. The curricular unit, however, serves in the seminar in 
the place conventionally assigned to a research paper. Whom is the 
curricular unit written for? That is, who, intellectually and rhetorically, 
is its audience? Is it the seminar leader? the Fellow himself? his 
students? or other teachers? Asking these questions implies some answer to 
them other than a general "yes," some attempt to resolve the ambiguity of 
the Fellows' role as a participant in the Institute.</p>
<p>Because the curricular units are reproduced by the Institute and 
distributed through the New Haven Schools--eventually perhaps even more 
widely--they do represent a tangible "end product" of the Institute and of 
a teacher's participation as a Fellow. Their public, published nature puts 
a good deal of pressure on everyone concerned to have them meet a broad 
range of expectations, but especially Yale's (whose name goes on them) and 
the New Haven Schools (who are "paying for them"). Some of the Fellows find 
this pressure disagreeable, believing that it distracts them from the 
experience of personal intellectual growth which they understand to be the 
main purpose of the Institute. A visitor has few words of wisdom to offer, 
except to encourage the Institute to continue with the publication of 
either the curricular units or of some closely analogous written "end 
product." The pressure of this exercise focuses the energies of all but the 
most free-spirited of the Fellows, and it holds the teachers and the Yale 
faculty in a common community.</p>
<p>The Fellows are not ordinary graduate students--and here again the 
original conception of the Institute is to be praised. To some extent, the 
Fellows and the Yale faculty are peers. The faculty are authorities in the 
subject matters of their seminars and in the disciplines they represent. 
The Fellows derive their authority on the other hand, from their 
experiences as secondary school teachers. They know how their students 
behave in the classroom, and they have a keener, more detailed awareness of 
their personal and social lives than can the Yale faculty. This 
relationship as peers conditions somewhat the faculty's response to the 
early drafts and versions of the Fellows' curricular units. And it seems 
proper to me that it should. Though in some instances the intellectual 
skills of the Fellows are less well developed than those of a typical Yale 
freshman, the Yale faculty member does--and should--view his role in the 
writing and criticizing of curricular units as that of a demanding editor: 
he plays Maxwell Perkins to the Fellow's undisciplined Thomas Wolfe. This 
is on occasion, no doubt, a difficult fiction to maintain, but an important 
one.</p>
<p>The Teachers Institute has developed historically from a project 
originally devoted to the teaching of history. It works best, still, in the 
history seminars--the reasons for this would be interesting to speculate 
on. History is inherently a learned activity, depending on books, records, 
documents, the stuff of the classroom and study. There are things to be 
taught and learned. While the relationship between "reality" and its verbal 
representation in a narrative can, upon deep analysis, become infinitely 
complex, the ordinary person can go a long way, learning now this and now 
that about the historian's craft without committing fatal blunders in the 
earlier stages along the way. Because the story he constructs concerns 
"real" people and events it can always be made interesting and instructive. 
None of the other studies offered in the Institute this year--language and 
composition, literature, drama, art history, ecology, and 
mathematics--comes quite as easily and naturally to the classroom, where 
they are all slightly "displaced" from their "natural" setting.</p>
<p>Because these are all traditional school subjects, however, widely 
recognized as valuable approaches to the training of the young, the faculty 
and Fellows of the Institute are committed to "domesticating" them to the 
secondary classroom. As an outsider to secondary education I was impressed 
by how inexplicit this process of "domestication" seems to be in the 
schools. Again, history, on the day of my visit, was an exception. One of 
the Fellows gave a report to the seminar on "The Present as History" in 
which he outlined a curricular unit on the history of New Haven. In 
addition to detailing relevant documents and events, he went on to 
enumerate explicitly the intellectual skills he hoped to develop in his 
students by the end of the year. Not only was it a pleasure to hear a 
master teacher consider the details of his craft; it awakened me to how 
little of his kind of thinking seemed to be brought by the Fellows as a 
group to their work in the Institute.</p>
<p>If it is generally true that school curricula are specific about the 
subject matters that are to be taught at the various grade-levels, but not 
about the intellectual skills that such teaching is intended to develop in 
the students, then a conspicuous area exists in which the activities of the 
Institute and the curricular units produced by it can be of extraordinary 
value.</p>
<p>The most promising example of which I was aware on my visit was the 
seminar on "Problem Solving." The seminar leaders were superb teachers. I 
saw them in action and I had a long conversation with them the next morning 
at breakfast. The Fellows in their seminar, however, came to them with such 
divergent backgrounds in mathematics that it was difficult to discover 
common ground, either of topics or of rigor. It was difficult, too, to see 
how some of the Fellows would be able to use their experience in the 
Institute either for personal development or as teachers. Given an 
exceptionally talented and wise faculty, the situation seemed discouraging. 
I began to understand, however, as I talked to the seminar leaders and to 
one or two of the Fellows, that the basic skills weakest in, say, 
eighth-grade students are scarcely mathematical. Rather, what too 
frequently retards their development is an inability to move back and forth 
between ordinary language and the system of thought and symbols used in 
even elementary arithmetic and in science. As it was described to me by the 
Fellows, their students' weakness is a conceptualizing one, an inability, 
for example, to move from a prose statement to a statement of the same 
problem as a series of simple computational operations. The obverse is the 
inability, for example, to interpret a graph in ordinary language.</p>
<p>A basic conceptualizing weakness of this sort would undermine further 
progress in a great many subjects, not only mathematics, but the natural 
and social sciences as well. It might disguise itself, in terms of a 
subject-matter-oriented school curriculum as a weakness in mathematics or 
science, whereas in fact it is anterior to them in the acquisition of 
skills. One is tempted to classify the development of these "pre-science 
cognitive skills" as, in terms of subject matter, falling more in the 
domain of "technical reading and writing" than of mathematics proper. Here 
I suspect, in other words, that an assessment of the intellectual 
weaknesses of students in school would show them to fall largely outside of 
the domain of mathematics and that, at the point of my visit at least, this 
was being demonstrated by the Teachers Institute. I would recommend, 
therefore, that the Institute offer instead of (or, preferably, in addition 
to) the <i>Problem Solving</i> seminar one in "Technical Reading and 
Writing" ("word problems") for middle-school teachers. It might be offered 
by almost any interested faculty member, perhaps ideally by a philosopher 
or psychologist.</p>
<p>History appears to occupy one extreme and mathematics the other, in the 
ability of the disciplines as they are understood in the university to 
contribute greatly to the production of curricular units that are addressed 
to the intellectual development of students in secondary school--perhaps I 
should say of the students one worries most about in the New Haven 
schools.</p>
<p>The activity, for both the seminars and the curricular units, that 
seemed on my brief visit open to possible development was an 
examination--discipline by discipline--of what intellectual skills 
secondary students typically lack and what contribution a study of each 
discipline can make to their development. As frequently as we ask, "What 
does this teach the student about life?" we might also ask, "What does this 
teach the student to do with his mind?"</p>
<p>The answers to such questions are implicit in the activities of each 
seminar. The art history, literature, and drama seminars all deal with 
materials that have great power to affect students--both the Fellows 
themselves and the students in their classrooms. Such aesthetic experience 
is, of course, significant in itself. The analysis of that experience--what 
was it? what artistic elements produced it?--proceeds differently around a 
seminar table at Yale than in an eleventh-grade classroom. Ideally, 
however, the experience at Yale should lead from the question "What am I 
learning how to do?" to the question "What can I use this experience to 
teach my students how to do?"</p>
<p>The seminar on "Man and the Environment" seemed to work as easily and 
naturally as did the history seminar, which is to say that the topic, the 
discipline, the previous training and experience of the Fellows, and the 
applicability of the seminar's content to the school curriculum all seemed 
compatible. It might be instructive, as with history, to examine why this 
is so. Both disciplines--history and ecology--focus steadily on the "real" 
world. Both can be respectably begun at an elementary level, in 
straightforward language, without great distortion; and yet each proceeds, 
at its most sophisticated development, to make powerful demands on the 
scholar, which, when satisfied, can produce statements of great interest 
and consequence to our understanding of the world.</p>
<p>I suspect that somewhere near the heart of any speculation about the 
education of urban secondary students the general question should be raised 
of language and its various uses in school. History and ecology begin in 
natural, literal language that is used to represent the real world. Soon, 
of course, the study of man in his environment requires the disciplined use 
of second "kind" of language: the special symbols and associated thought 
that I referred to earlier as "technical and writing." The third "kind" of 
language is the metaphorical language of art, which creates its own world 
rather than attempting to refer directly to the real world. Some such 
analysis as this is, of course, implicit in Mr. Winn's seminar on "Language 
and Writing." Applying to this seminar my overall suggestion of greater 
explicitness in identifying the skills that the various disciplines are 
intended to foster, I might suggest that in some future year a seminar on 
language and writing be organized to illustrate only slightly more 
explicitly than is being done this year the kinds of reading and writing 
that children should learn how to do. Ideally, the readings and writings 
could be closely associated with either those of the other seminars or 
those suggested in the curricular units produced in the other seminars.</p>
<p>The Institute, as I reported at the outset, works very well. In an 
effort to discover why rather than simply to report the fact, one is 
impressed at every point with the steady intelligence, industry, and will 
of a large number of people, most conspicuously its director and the 
outstanding Yale faculty he has recruited. The relationship of the 
Institute to the New Haven schools has been developed with ingenuity and 
good sense and depends, too, on the enlightened leadership of the schools 
at every level and on the devotion of the school Coordinators to their 
important duties.</p>
<p>At some point, it was decided that there would be only one class of 
membership in the Institute, that is no <i>ex officio</i> or "honorary" 
fellows. Every Fellow is expected to attend the lectures and seminars and 
write a curricular unit. This was a sound decision. It may, however, 
because of their summertime duties, have made it difficult for the 
administrators of the New Haven schools to participate as fully as they 
might wish, especially the curriculum supervisors. The difficulty, of 
course, is that their intellectual role in the schools cannot easily be 
separated from their "managerial" role, which would have a chilling effect 
on the other Fellows, who, by university standards, are already too 
reluctant to criticize each other's ideas and curricular units. But some 
way of recognizing the support of the supervisors, some listing or title, 
might suitably be arrived at.</p>
<p>Because the Institute depends so heavily on the manifold excellence of 
Yale, and on the good will of the New Haven schools, I wonder, in 
conclusion, to what degree it could be replicated at another university or 
could be extended beyond New Haven by Yale. As I stated at the beginning, 
it is important that the experiment be tried. My advice to anyone who 
attempted to establish such an Institute elsewhere would be to follow Mr. 
Vivian's scheme as closely as humanly possible. It requires access to the 
university's best, to its best faculty, its ambiance of cultivated 
intellectual vigor, its special facilities and collections, such as those 
enjoyed by Mr. Miller's seminar in environmental sciences.</p>
<p>It also requires a deep and sympathetic understanding of how education 
works, from the technicalities of school administration on one hand to a 
necessary confidence in the power of an informed, imaginative, and 
energetic teacher to affect the lives of his students and his students' 
students.</p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>