---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: Preface"
path: "/pubs/A4/preface.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">Preface</h2>
<p>The College Board and its Educational EQuality Project are 
pleased to make this report from the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute more 
widely available. <i>Teaching in America: The Common Ground</i> presents 
accounts of secondary school teachers and university faculty working 
together to prepare a broad variety of curriculum units for use in the New 
Haven Public Schools. The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is a 
participant in the Educational EQuality Project's Models Program for High 
School-College Collaboration, and there are several reasons this report 
deserves attention and thoughtful consideration.</p>
<p>The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute has a clearly defined and 
commendable purpose. It works to improve the education of all secondary 
school students in the New Haven Public Schools by enabling their teachers 
to continue to enrich their own learning. Like the Educational EQuality 
Project, the Institute is committed to the joint goals of quality and 
equality in the education of all students. Achieving these goals is a tough 
and important problem. Three out of five students in the New Haven Public 
Schools come from families receiving some form of public assistance. Four 
out of five are either black or hispanic. Since this demographic pattern 
will become increasingly characteristic of public school enrollment 
throughout the United States, the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute has 
chosen, in a sense, to wrestle with the nation's educational future. And 
yet, although the reputation and influence of Yale University extend far 
beyond the precincts of New Haven, the Institute has chosen to limit its 
work to the public schools of that city. This sharply focused effort 
increases the likelihood of achieving significant progress toward the goals 
of educational quality and equality.</p>
<p>The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute also commands wider consideration 
because of the means it has identified to accomplish its purpose. The 
Institute is animated by the co-professionalism of teachers in the New 
Haven Public Schools and teachers on the faculty of Yale University. To 
this relationship each group brings its own special knowledge and skills. 
Thomas R. Whitaker notes later in this volume that "The Institute assumes 
that by and large the seminar leaders drawn from the University faculty 
will provide the major competence and initiatives in the area of 
`subject-matter,' and that the Fellows drawn from the faculty of the New 
Haven middle schools and secondary schools will provide the major 
competence and initiatives in the area of pedagogy. This understanding is a 
primary support for the `collegiality' without which the seminars would 
rapidly deteriorate into fairly conventional classes." The essays in this 
volume nearly vibrate as the realities of the urban classroom encounter the 
truths of the research university. By standing their common ground the two 
groups of teachers again and again create results richer than what either 
brings to the encounter. The co-professionalism of this mutually enriching 
engagement is reflected in the Institute's organizational arrangements. 
Control is shared. Topics for the seminars are generated by the secondary 
school teachers. Content of the seminars is drawn largely from the 
university professors. Administration involves representatives of the 
secondary school teachers as well as university personnel. The College 
Board, itself an association of schools and colleges, has a high and 
knowledgeable regard for such cooperation.</p>
<p>Finally, the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is remarkable because of 
its sustained commitment to its work. It is a commonplace that waves of 
reform wash across American education with predictable regularity and 
disappointing results. Fundamental social change comes not from momentary 
enthusiasm but from long-term staying power. The Institute is determined to 
make such a serious, on-going effort. Between 1978 and 1982 forty percent 
of New Haven public secondary school teachers in the humanities and 
sciences participated in the Institute's seminars. Nine out of ten of them 
are likely to return for another seminar. Two out of three of the other 
teachers are inclined to participate in the future. Another sign of the 
Institute's long-term commitment is its effort to raise an endowment so as 
to become financially self-sustaining. This effort clearly deserves the 
greatest success.</p>
<p>In addition to the College Board and its Educational EQuality Project, 
several other organizations have recognized the importance of the Yale-New 
Haven Teachers Institute. In March 1984 the American Association for Higher 
Education celebrated the Institute as a national leader in a growing 
movement of collaboration between universities and public schools. In 
October of 1984 the Council for the Advancement and Support of Education 
selected the Institute as a grand award winner in its high school-college 
partnerships program.</p>
<p>In a more fundamental sense, the following essays are the best evidence 
of the value and success of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. The 
essays concern not simply organizational arrangements but the actual stuff 
of teaching and learning, subject matter and shaping it for use in the 
classroom. Just as the bottom line in education reform is what actually 
happens between teachers and students in the classroom, so the final test 
of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute must be what happens in its 
seminars. These essays show New Haven Public School teachers and Yale 
University professors finding rich and productive common ground, fashioning 
together thoughtful and practical responses to the challenge of building 
simultaneously quality and equality in the secondary school classroom.</p>
<p>Because of this example of high school and college teachers working 
together, we want to share more widely the descriptions of their 
accomplishments contained in <i>Teaching in America: The Common Ground.</i> 
The specific curriculum units described here can lead to further discussion 
and perhaps adaptation to other circumstances. The organizational 
principles followed by the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute certainly 
should receive careful consideration elsewhere. They well might inspire 
similar efforts in other locations. But in showing how academic 
collaboration actually can work to improve what happens in the secondary 
school classroom, <i>Teaching in America</i> will provide common and 
fruitful ground that high school and college teachers can begin to till all 
around the country.</p>
<p align="RIGHT">Adrienne Y. Bailey<br/>
Vice President for<br/>
Academic Affairs<br/>
The College Board</p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>