---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: The Concept of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute: The Primacy of Teachers"
path: "/pubs/A4/vivian.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">The Concept of the Yale-New Haven<br/>
Teachers Institute:<br/>
The Primacy of Teachers</h2>
<p align="CENTER"><big>by James R. Vivian</big></p>
<p>For several years the national concern about the condition of 
secondary education, especially in our urban high schools, has been deep 
and widespread. With the numerous education studies and reports that were 
released and publicized in 1983, the critical scrutiny of our public 
schools reached the highest level in two decades. We place enormous demands 
upon public education in America. Many believe that our system of 
government, our economic productivity, and our social cohesiveness all 
depend on free and universal secondary education. Yet analysts in the 
public and private sectors assert, and such statistical measures as the 
long-term decline of Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores have appeared to 
confirm, that high schools graduate many students who are ill-prepared to 
enter either college or the workforce and to undertake their civic and 
social responsibilities. Public confidence in our schools has been eroded, 
and salaries and public esteem for teachers are low.</p>
<p>For their own part, secondary school administrators and teachers 
complain that they are battered by bad publicity and besieged by frequent 
changes in what colleges, parents, and the public want students to learn, 
and that the educational progress is impeded by financial, political, and 
social problems of unmanageable proportions. Declining enrollments and 
financial constraints have caused an unprecedented reduction in the demand 
for teachers, while by the mid-1980s the supply of new teacher graduates 
will not meet even this reduced demand. Already there is a shortage of 
qualified teachers in some regions of the country and in some fields, 
notably science and mathematics. Yet college students interested in 
teaching hear about the bleak prospects they might face in finding a job, 
or in supporting a family if they do. Many are discouraged from entering 
the profession, while some individuals already in the profession are 
leaving teaching for more lucrative employment.</p>
<p>The New Haven Public Schools are no exception: more than 60% of their 
secondary students come from families receiving some form of public 
assistance; 83% are either black or hispanic; 45% of those entering the 9th 
grade do not graduate. Absenteeism and the high mobility of students among 
schools impair the ability of teachers to plan a logical sequence for 
learning in their courses. The turnover of teachers presently is only 2%, 
and about half of New Haven secondary teachers teach subjects in which they 
did not major in college or graduate school. Many report, not surprisingly, 
that teaching has become more stressful.</p>
<p>As early as 1980 two national panels issued their findings on the state 
of student learning in the sciences and the humanities. A joint National 
Science Foundation/Department of Education study spoke of "a trend toward 
virtual scientific and technological illiteracy." The Commission on the 
Humanities concluded that "a dramatic improvement in the quality of 
education in our elementary and secondary schools is the highest 
educational priority in the 1980s." The Commission called for curricula to 
teach children "to read well, to write clearly and to think critically." 
They also found that "the need to interrelate the humanities, social 
sciences, science and technology has probably never been greater than 
today."</p>
<p>These problems are no less important to Yale than national problems in 
secondary education are to universities generally, and Yale's reasons for 
becoming involved transcend altruism or a sense of responsibility to the 
New Haven community. As Yale President A. Bartlett Giamatti pointed out in 
an interview on the December 7, 1980, David Susskind television program, 
"it is profoundly in our self-interest to have coherent, well-taught, 
well-thought-out curricula" in our local schools, and in secondary schools 
throughout the country. Yale acted upon this view in 1970, when the History 
Department began the History Education Project (HEP), which assisted a 
number of New Haven social studies teachers in developing improved 
curricula for courses in American history, world area studies, and urban 
studies.</p>
<p>The success of HEP led to discussions about organizing a more ambitious 
and demanding program which would include additional disciplines. This was 
a specific response to the general question: How can institutions located 
in center-city areas become constructively involved in addressing problems 
of the communities where they reside, and on which they depend? The way 
that Yale and New Haven answered this question, we believed, might be of 
interest to universities and school systems elsewhere.</p>
<p>Teachers and administrators from the University and the Schools quickly 
reached a consensus: The relationship between the University and the 
Schools must be both prominent and permanent within any viable larger 
relationship between Yale and New Haven, and, of the many ways Yale might 
aid New Haven, none is more logical or defensible than a program that 
shares Yale's educational resources with the Schools. Because of changing 
student needs, changing objectives set by the school system and each level 
of government, and changing scholarship, school curricula undergo constant 
revision. Because of Yale's strength in the academic disciplines, all 
agreed that developing curricula, further preparing teachers in the 
subjects they teach, and assisting teachers to keep abreast of changes in 
their fields were the ways that Yale could most readily assist the 
Schools.</p>
<p>The intent was not to create new resources at Yale; rather, it was to 
make available in a planned way our existing strength, that is, to expand 
and institutionalize the work of University faculty members with their 
colleagues in the Schools. Even at this early stage, both Yale and the 
Schools sought a course of action that might have a substantial impact. The 
objective was eventually to involve as many teachers and subjects as 
possible, so that the program might address the school curricula, and thus 
students' education, broadly. The Teachers Institute was established, then, 
in 1978 as a joint program of Yale University and the New Haven Public 
Schools, and designed to strengthen teaching and thereby to improve student 
learning in the humanities and the sciences in our community's middle and 
high schools.</p>
<p>From the outset, teachers have played a leading role in determining how 
Yale and the school system together can help them meet the needs of all 
their students, not only the needs of students who later will enter 
college. The Institute seeks to involve all teachers who state an interest 
in one of our seminars and who can demonstrate the relation of their 
Institute work to courses they will teach in the coming year. The Institute 
does not involve a special group of teachers who teach a special group of 
students; rather, it is an intensive effort to assist teachers throughout 
the school system, grades 7-12.</p>
<p>Each year about 80 New Haven school teachers become Fellows of the 
Institute to work with Yale faculty members on topics the teachers 
themselves have identified. Many of the University's most distinguished 
faculty have given talks and led seminars in the program. Seminar topics 
have included geology, the environment, medical imaging, student writing, 
drama, British studies, the arts and material culture, the American family, 
society and literature in Latin America, and a variety of other topics in 
literature, history, and culture. In a rigorous four-and-one-half month 
program of talks, workshops, and seminars, teachers study these subjects 
and prepare new curricular materials that they and other teachers will use 
in the coming school year. The materials that Fellows write are compiled 
into a volume for each seminar and distributed to all New Haven teachers 
who might use them. Teams of seminar members promote widespread use of 
these materials by presenting workshops for colleagues during the school 
year.</p>
<p>In 1980 the Commission on the Humanities cited the Teachers Institute as 
a promising model of university-school collaboration that "integrates 
curriculum development with intellectual renewal for teachers." In 1982, in 
awarding a second three-year grant to the Institute, the National Endowment 
for the Humanities expressed the hope that the program would become 
permanent and that universities and schools in other communities would 
establish similar programs for their mutual benefit. In 1984 the American 
Association for Higher Education recognized the Institute as a pioneering 
and nationally important program with an exemplary approach for improving 
public secondary education. As we anticipated, there is now widespread 
interest in what we have accomplished in New Haven; it therefore seems 
timely to set forth the conceptual bases for our approach.</p>
<p>Four principles, all implanted in the first institute in 1978, and each 
shaped over time by experience, guide the program and constitute much of 
its distinctiveness. They are: (I) our belief in the fundamental importance 
of the classroom teacher and of teacher-developed materials for effective 
learning; (2) our insistence that teachers of students at different levels 
interact as colleagues, addressing the common problems of teaching their 
disciplines; (3) our conviction that any effort to improve teaching must be 
"teacher-centered" and our consequent dependence on the Institute 
coordinators, teachers in each school, who meet weekly with the director 
and who constitute an essential part of the program's leadership; and (4) 
our certainty that the University can assist in improving the public 
schools only if we make a significant and long-term commitment to do 
so.</p>
<p>The Institute differs from conventional modes of curricular 
development.<sup><a href="#note_1">*</a></sup> <a name="text_1">Classroom teachers, who best know their students' needs, work 
with Yale faculty members, who are leading scholars in their fields. The 
Institute does not develop curricula on certain topics only because they 
are important in terms of recent scholarship; rather, it brings this 
knowledge to the assistance of teachers in areas they identify as their 
main concerns. The Institute involves no "curriculum experts" in the usual 
sense, who would themselves develop new materials, train teachers in 
short-term workshops to use these materials, and then expect the materials 
significantly to improve classroom teaching. Instead, the Institute seeks 
to demonstrate that intensive and long-term collaboration between a 
university and its neighboring school system--between school teachers and 
university scholars--can produce curriculum materials of high quality 
pertinent to students needs, and can have a major influence on teaching and 
learning in the schools.</a></p><a name="text_1">
<p>We stress that public school teachers should write curricula for their 
own classrooms because our main concerns are for the further preparation of 
each teacher accepted as an Institute Fellow and for the development in 
depth of new materials and approaches for classroom use. In applying to the 
Institute, teachers describe topics they most want to develop; Yale faculty 
circulate seminar proposals related to these topics; and the coordinators, 
after canvassing other teachers, ultimately select which seminars will be 
offered.</p>
<p>In effect, New Haven teachers determine the subject matter for the 
program each year. The seminars have two related and equally important 
purposes: general study of the seminar subject and research and writing on 
individual curriculum units. By writing a curriculum unit, teachers think 
formally about the ways in which what they are learning can be applied in 
their own teaching; we emphasize that the Institute experience must have a 
direct bearing on their own classes. Each Fellow devises a unit related to 
the general topic of his or her seminar, reads independently toward that 
unit, writes several drafts, and presents work in progress to the others in 
the seminar. The units that emerge reflect both the direction provided by 
the Yale faculty and the experience gained by each teacher in the 
classroom, his or her sense of what will work for students.</p>
<p>This balance between academic preparation and practical, classroom 
application--as well as the depth and duration of our local collaborative 
relationship--are the central features of the Yale-New Haven Teachers 
Institute. Our outside evaluator in 1980, Professor Robert Kellogg, Dean of 
the College at the University of Virginia, points out:</p>
<blockquote>That Yale does not have a school or a department of Education 
is in this instance a blessing. Without an intermediary buffer, softening, 
exaggerating, or explaining away the contrast of intellectual milieu 
between secondary education and higher education, the two groups of 
teachers (the Institute Fellows and the Yale faculty) are free to explore 
for themselves the extent to which they share values and assumptions about 
their subject and its role in the development of children's minds and 
characters.</blockquote>
<p>The Institute is the only interschool and interdisciplinary forum 
enabling school teachers to work with each other and with Yale faculty. In 
referring to the collegial spirit of the program, we are speaking of a 
dynamic process that brings together individuals who teach very different 
students at different levels of their subjects, and who bring to the 
program a variety of perspectives and strongly held points of view. The 
tensions and disagreements that arise from these different perspectives are 
a source of vitality and innovation. Each challenges the preconceptions of 
the other with the result that University faculty understand something more 
about teaching at the secondary level while school teachers often 
reconsider their expectations of their students' ability to learn. With our 
emphasis on the authority of the secondary school teacher, the bond between 
Fellows and Yale faculty is one of mutual respect and a shared commitment 
to the best education for New Haven students.</p>
<p>The Institute is organized to foster this sense of collegiality. Fellows 
are not students paying tuition for regular, graduate-level courses. 
Instead, teachers are remunerated, each Fellow receiving an honorarium on 
successful completion of the program. As full members of the Yale 
community, Fellows are listed in the University Directory of faculty and 
staff; this has symbolic meaning in recognizing them as colleagues and 
practical value in making Yale resources readily accessible to them. 
Through the Institute, teachers gain access to human and physical resources 
throughout the University, not only to those specifically organized by the 
Institute.</p>
<p>Also, the seminars are conducted in an informal, flexible style--a 
tradition established by the first group of Yale faculty who taught in the 
program, and maintained by some continuity of faculty and faculty meetings 
with the coordinators and director. This makes the Institute completely 
unlike the graduate-level courses in education most of the Fellows have 
taken, and often unlike the graduate seminars most of the Yale faculty 
ordinarily teach.</p>
<p>In order to practice collegiality in the day-to-day workings of the 
Institute, we devised an administrative structure that would reflect the 
primacy of teachers. We did not wish the program to be something concocted 
by Yale and imposed upon the Fellows, nor did we wish to create different 
classes of Fellows by involving New Haven school administrators in 
administrative roles in the Institute. At the most practical level, we 
hoped to use peers to solve problems of absence or lateness, in order to 
avoid placing the Yale faculty in authoritarian roles. The coordinators 
have provided a solution to all these potential difficulties. Again, 
Professor Kellogg's report puts the matter well:</p>
<blockquote>In order that the "managerial" aspect of the school 
administration not be reflected in the operation of the Institute, a small 
group of teachers, the Institute coordinators, serves to "represent" both 
the schools in the Institute and the Institute in the schools. The 
conception is ingenious, and the individuals who serve as coordinators are, 
more than any other single element, crucial to the Institute's successful 
operation. The coordinators I met were thoughtful and intelligent men and 
women who understood the purpose of the Institute and were effective 
representatives of the two institutions of which they were members.</blockquote>
<p>Through the coordinators, who collectively represent every middle 
and high school teacher in the humanities and in the sciences, teachers are 
directly involved in the cyclical planning, conduct, evaluation, and 
refinement of the program. Through them we have developed and maintained 
both rigorous expectations and an accommodating schedule so that there has 
been a high level of participation by New Haven teachers. Between 1978 and 
1982 40% of New Haven secondary school teachers in the humanities and the 
sciences successfully completed at least one year of the Institute. The 
evaluation of the Coordinators by participating Fellows confirms their 
crucial role; one Fellow wrote, "as long as there are teacher coordinators, 
the program will belong to all the participants." This proprietary feeling 
of teachers toward the Institute, the feeling that it is 
"teacher-centered," is essential to our success.</p>
<p>To participate in so demanding a program, teachers must believe that the 
Institute can assist them in their own teaching and that, by extension, it 
can eventually improve teaching and learning throughout the schools. Our 
evaluator in 1981, Ernest L. Boyer, wrote in his report:</p>
<blockquote>The project has teacher-coordinators in each participating 
school who clearly are committed and who pass on their enthusiasm to 
colleagues. One of the most impressive features of my visit was the after 
school session I had with these coordinators from the New Haven schools. 
Arriving after a fatiguing day, the teachers turned, with enthusiasm, to 
key issues. How can the Institute best help us meet our goals? How can we 
improve our work? . . . The dedication and optimism of these teachers was 
impressive, almost touching. . . . The significance of teacher leadership 
cannot be overstated.</blockquote>
<p>Using common sense, we know that the impact of the Institute will 
be roughly proportional to the number of teachers who participate on a 
recurring basis. The impact of the Institute on teachers' preparation and 
curricula is cumulative; we must annually involve a large enough proportion 
of New Haven teachers to be credible in claiming that their participation 
can improve the public schools. Each curriculum unit written by a teacher 
represents only a fraction of all he or she teaches, and the very nature of 
the academic disciplines and their teaching is not static, but constantly 
changing. Should the Institute ever become so limited in scope or duration 
as to appear trivial, it would cease to attract a sizable percentage of New 
Haven teachers and would become ineffectual. In one of its principal 
recommendations the Commission on the Humanities concluded</p>
<blockquote>Because schools change slowly, we endorse models of 
school-college collaboration that emphasize long-term cooperation. We 
recommend that more colleges or universities and school districts adopt 
such programs for their mutual benefit, and that funding sources sustain 
programs and administrative costs on a continuing basis. Programs of 
school-college collaboration offer the best opportunity to strengthen 
instruction in the schools while providing intellectual renewal for 
teachers.</blockquote>
<p>It is therefore most encouraging that, after five years of 
developing the Teachers Institute as a model of university-school 
collaboration, Yale decided to seek a $4-million endowment to give the 
program a secure future.</p>
<p>There is, in my view, no more important recommendation in the 
Carnegie Foundation Special Report on <i>School</i> <i>and College</i> than 
the one--contained also in the Carnegie Report on <i>High School--</i>that 
calls for universities and schools to develop genuine partnerships based on 
the needs of schools as determined by their principals and teachers. Both 
aspects of that recommendation are essential: not only that universities 
and schools work together, but especially that those of us in higher 
education encourage our colleagues in schools to show us the ways we can 
marshall our resources to address their needs.</p>
<p>Not all teachers are sanguine about the prospects for public secondary 
education. But the vision of the Institute, which many share, is that the 
problems confronting us are not intractable, and that working through the 
Institute teachers can improve the education and the lives of their 
students.</p>
<p>Efforts at school improvement will not succeed without teacher 
leadership. In this country we have too long held teachers responsible for 
the condition of our schools without giving them responsibility--empowering 
them--to improve our schools. This fundamental precept has proved 
indispensable to the success of our Teachers Institute and will continue to 
guide our work.</p>
<hr/>
</a><a name="note_1">
<p><sup>*</sup> See especially Seymour B. Sarason, <i>The Culture of the School and the Problem of Change</i> (Boston: l97l), chapter 4, who discusses the contrary manner in which "new math" was developed and introduced in the classroom.</p>
</a><p><a name="note_1"><small>[ </small></a><small><a href="#text_1">Back to text</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>