---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: The Play's the Thing"
path: "/pubs/A4/whitaker.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">The Play's the Thing</h2>
<p align="CENTER"><big>by Thomas R. Whitaker</big></p>
<blockquote>"Unity in diversity must be our social ideal, and it is this that drama in its very nature does expound and, through the sympathetic power of impersonation, interpret. This is the drama's secret." --Harley Granville-Barker, <i>The Exemplary Theatre</i></blockquote>
<p>Should I or shouldn't I? The opportunity to lead another seminar 
for the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute had thrown me into some 
uncertainty. I couldn't deny that my seminar of the previous year, on the 
teaching of writing, had been on balance fairly satisfactory. But it had 
brought home to me the tremendous disparity between the usual educational 
and social assumptions of a university classroom and those necessarily made 
by secondary- and middle-school teachers in New Haven. And it had reminded 
me that any group of such teachers would turn out to be surprisingly 
diverse in background, ability, and educational interests. I hadn't found 
it easy to keep a single conversation going that would include the 
teachers' college graduate in her sixties who wanted to enliven her 
seventh-grade class in remedial reading, the Stanford graduate in her early 
thirties now working with imaginative but unruly adolescents in an 
"alternative" high school, and that intense young man who hoped to prepare 
his more talented seniors for advanced placement at his alma mater, the 
University of Connecticut.</p>
<p>That seminar had worked, I thought, only because our concern for 
improving writing was multiform or protean enough to bring together, at 
least momentarily, our various levels of preparation and our various 
educational missions. Our shared concern had allowed me to serve as a 
mediator and resource person while the Fellows proceeded to develop their 
curriculum units, each directed toward some aspect of our larger "writing 
problem" in a manner suited to a specific classroom. But how could I cope 
with such diversity in another seminar, which would have to deal with a 
more literary subject? What connections could we find between the college 
teaching of a "period" or "genre" and the evident needs of these teachers? 
What could be our unifying focus?</p>
<p>On reflection, it seemed to me that the seminar's Fellows and its leader 
might all stand a chance of learning something useful if we took "drama" as 
our subject and "performance" as our point of attack. That might pose some 
questions and provide some opportunities that would be new for all of us, 
regardless of our previous experience as teachers of English or foreign 
language. It might provide us, therefore, with some common ground for 
exploration. Not that such a foray in the direction of "performance" would 
be utterly novel. During the past few decades there has been a rapid 
expansion in the field of educational drama. Role-taking and role-playing 
have entered many kinds of classrooms. Secondary schools and colleges have 
introduced not only courses but often whole departments devoted to drama. 
And at every level many teachers of English or foreign language are asking 
their students to do some reading of plays aloud, if only as an aid to 
overcoming the barriers separating them from a written language that seems 
difficult or alien. Nevertheless, we are still far from realizing the 
vision of Harley Granville-Barker, that remarkable 
actor-director-dramatist-and-scholar, who argued in 1922 that a "theatre as 
school" should be a central model for education in a democratic society. 
What would happen if our seminar tried afresh to move toward 
Granville-Barker's vision of the possible?</p>
<p>The professional school that Granville-Barker had proposed would focus 
on the "cooperative reading" of scripts in seminars requiring that every 
student assume by turns the roles of interpreter, actor, director, and 
critic. It would be the task of those teaching such seminars to lead a 
heterogeneous group toward a fresh and creative reconciliation of their 
emerging views about the play in question--a reconciliation not just 
formulated in words but tested and partly discovered through enactment. The 
learning involved in this process would be at once intellectual, emotional, 
visual, and kinesthetic. Its social dynamics, Granville-Barker argued, 
would constitute the best possible preparation for life in a democratic 
society. Indeed, its final aim would be the continual rediscovery of the 
truth that a creative consensus can emerge only as each individual in a 
group begins to learn the art of seeing and experiencing oneself as 
"other," and the other as "oneself."</p>
<p>Even in our colleges and universities, experiments in this direction 
have been isolated and sporadic. They have been discouraged by our 
departmentalization of subject-matter, our all-too-frequent emphasis on 
passive reception of the oral and written word, and our recognition of the 
already heavy burdens upon every teacher. But there have also been more 
specific obstacles. On the one hand, departments of theatre often combine 
courses in theatre history and dramatic literature with "practical" courses 
that, in their emphasis upon production, tend to require the same uneasy 
mixture of authoritarian control and egocentric talent that feeds the 
commercial theatre. (Work with a genuine ensemble company no doubt 
constitutes an important exception to this generalization.) On the other 
hand, departments of English and foreign language often treat a play as if 
it were a fiction that just happens to have been written in dialogue. Not 
that we ever say as much. Richard David's wry reflection in <i>Shakespeare 
in the Theatre</i> might easily be echoed with respect to other 
playwrights: "That Shakespeare's plays were written for the theatre, and 
only in the theatre develop their full impact, has become the commonplace 
of criticism. . . . Nevertheless I suspect that much of this is no more 
than lip-service." Though J. L. Styan and others have long argued that we 
should read scripts as "scores" for performance, and though many teachers 
may agree with the directors and playwrights who have declared that the 
"play" is what goes on among actors and between actors and audience, our 
classroom activities usually remain insulated from such recognitions.</p>
<p>John Russell Brown's recent <i>Discovering Shakespeare</i> provides a 
striking indication of this state of affairs. It proposes a "revolution" in 
the classroom study of Shakespeare. Students should first engage the plays, 
Brown argues, not as interpreters of literature but as potential actors, 
directors, and members of an audience--and he provides a useful variety of 
pedagogical exercises along these lines. But the fact that he can propose 
such a revolution in 1981, after some two decades of work in this direction 
by himself and other writers and teachers, suggests how completely we have 
ignored the challenge of Granville-Barker's "exemplary theatre." Certainly 
we are far from experiencing what Granville-Barker himself thought would be 
the influence of his "theatre as school" upon secondary education. "We may 
also suppose," he had said, "that when the effect of the school's work has 
filtered down into general education the co-operative study of plays will 
be finding, in a simple form, a place in most classes for boys and girls of 
fourteen to sixteen."</p>
<p>Of course, since 1922 both the theatrical and the educational scenes 
have become much more complicated. Any attempt to approach 
Granville-Barker's vision today must reckon with a multitude of 
developments beyond his imagining--in the themes and styles of modern 
drama, in the various disciplines of acting, in psychological theory and 
practice, in pedagogy and educational drama, and in our social contexts. 
But those developments might offer our seminar, I began to think, a useful 
range of opportunities--even if we had to approach them by the limited 
routes available to classroom teachers of literature or language. Working 
together, with individual emphases that would accord with our various 
preparations, temperaments, and institutional contexts, we might set 
ourselves the task of introducing drama carefully into courses that had 
hitherto been dealing only with "dramatic literature" or with language 
skills. In doing so, we might begin to engage motivations and elicit 
perceptions of which we hadn't thought our students capable. We might 
stumble on some new areas for interdisciplinary teaching. In any, case, we 
would move ourselves somewhat closer to the demonstrable--which is to say, 
the <i>actable</i>--meanings of the dramatic texts we read and teach.</p>
<hr/>
<p>The library resources for a seminar of the kind I began to imagine 
certainly seemed ample enough. For a survey of the disciplines informing 
dramatic activities in the classroom we might turn to Richard Courtney's 
Play, Drama and Thought:The Intellectual Background to Drama in Education. 
Those interested in a somewhat narrower but more fully developed argument 
for the central role of aesthetic activity in education, stressing the 
visual and the psychological, might find it in Herbert Read's Education 
Through Art. (Were I to try another version of the seminar, I would also 
want to direct people to Robert J. Landy's recent Handbook of Educational 
Drama and Theatre, which reports on the great variety of dramatic 
activities now used in the educational process.)</p>
<p>More immediately useful for the Fellows of the seminar, I suspected, 
would be J. L. Styan's <i>The Elements of Drama</i>, which sets forth with 
admirable clarity the notion of the script as a "dramatic score." Some of 
Styan's later books--<i>Chekhov in Performance</i>, <i>Shakespeare's 
Stagecraft</i>, and <i>Drama, Stage and Audience</i>--develop more fully 
the implications of a "performance-oriented" pedagogy and criticism. 
Important, too, might be books by John Russell Brown--not only 
<i>Discovering Shakespeare</i> but also the earlier <i>Free Shakespeare 
</i>and <i>Shakespeare's Plays in Performance</i>. And three books by Peter 
Arnott--<i>An Introduction to Greek Theatre, An Introduction to French 
Theatre, </i>and <i>The Theater in Its Time</i>--might help to open up the 
history of theatre in a complementary way.</p>
<p>If we became intrigued by the opportunities and responsibilities of 
directional interpretation, we could turn to a few books that suggest much 
of the major activity in that field during the past century: <i>The Seagull 
Produced by Stanislavsky</i>, Bernard Dukore's <i>Bernard Shaw, 
Director</i>, Toby Cole and Helen Chinov's <i>Directors on Directing</i>, 
John Fernald's <i>Sense of Direction,</i> Harold Clurman's <i>On 
Directing</i>, and Peter Brook's <i>The Empty Space.</i> If we wanted to 
consider Constantin Stanislavsky's approach to acting, which has inspired 
the dominant methods in American schools of drama, we might sample it in 
<i>An Actor Prepares, Building a Character</i>, and Stanislavsky's 
<i>Legacy. </i>Perhaps, however, we would find Richard Boleslavski's 
<i>Acting: The First Six Lessons</i> and Michael Chekhov's<i> To The 
Actor</i> more easily accessible introductions to Stanislavsky's insights. 
In any case, we might find ourselves then turning to Pamela Price Walker's 
<i>Seven Steps to Creative Children's Dramatics</i>, which felicitously 
adapts the rudiments of that approach to the needs of elementary or 
secondary education.</p>
<p>I suspected that we might find in "improvisation" many potential 
applications to our work in the classroom. The richest and most influential 
book of theatre exercises and games is no doubt Viola Spolin's 
<i>Improvisation for the Theater</i>. Some teachers might rightly feel, 
however, that it has all the daunting compendiousness of a book of recipes 
when the real question is: What will exactly suit my five guests this 
evening? Joseph Chaikin's <i>The Presence of the Actor</i> and Robert 
Pasolli's <i>A Book on the Open Theatre</i> might be more helpful at first, 
in suggesting how improvisational work can be integrated into the on-going 
experience of an ensemble company. For the teacher of any subject on any 
level, I thought, Keith Johnstone's <i>Impro: Improvisation and the 
Theatre</i> would be an admirably wide-ranging and unsettling book. One 
might also wrestle Clive Barker's provocative<i> Theatre Games</i>. And 
more directly applicable to the usual secondary-school curriculum would be 
such books as Louis John Deszeran's <i>The Student Actor's Handbook,</i> 
Jack Preston Held's <i>Improvisational Acting</i>, and Milton Polsky's 
<i>Let's Improvise</i>.</p>
<p>Surely some of the seminar's Fellows might be interested in relating 
drama to the teaching of writing. Granville-Barker's idea of "co-operative 
reading" rather easily correlates with at least some aspects of what Edwin 
Mason writes of in <i>Collaborative Learning</i> and Kenneth A. Bruffee has 
been applying in English courses at Brooklyn College. Though they have 
rather different philosophical bearings, Granville-Barker and Bruffee both 
assume that the mind is inherently social, that knowledge is consensual, 
and that how we learn is therefore inseparable from what we learn. 
Bruffee's suggestions for classroom procedures might be sampled in <i>A 
Short Course in Writing</i>: theoretical grounding might be observed in his 
recent article in <i>Liberal Education</i>. For hints about ways of 
relating playscripts to the practice of writing, however, we might turn 
first to Bernard Grebanier's <i>Playwrighting </i>and Sam Smiley's 
<i>Playwriting: The Structure of Action</i>. Geraldine Brain Siks' 
<i>Children's Literature for Dramatization</i> might provide another way 
into this subject. And Keith Johnstone's <i>Impro </i>would again be 
useful, this time for its lively demonstrations that absolutely anyone can 
be led to discover and unleash his or her inhibited powers of verbal 
creativity.</p>
<p>Indeed, my list of initial resources had swiftly become rather unwieldy. 
No matter how far the individual Fellows might want to range in developing 
their own curriculum unit, we would need to focus our scheduled ten 
meetings on a few areas that could provide us with some quite specific 
common ground. But how could I begin to shape such a seminar?</p>
<hr/>
<p>From here on, my present narrative will be more coherent and perhaps 
more useful if it manages to blend the autobiographical and the 
hypothetical. For me the process of discovery continued past the early 
stages of planning and well on into the give-and-take of the seminar 
actually offered. The following sketch is therefore based on that first 
attempt with the Fellows of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, but it 
is modified and amplified in directions that I would now think valuable to 
explore on some other suitable occasion.</p>
<p>First a few ground rules: The Institute assumes that by and large the 
seminar leaders drawn from the University faculty will provide the major 
competence and initiatives in the area of "subject matter," and that the 
Fellows drawn from the faculties of New Haven middle schools and secondary 
schools will provide the major competence and initiatives in the area of 
pedagogy. This understanding is a primary support for the "collegiality" 
without which the seminars would rapidly deteriorate into fairly 
conventional classes. The Institute further assumes that the seminars will 
engage in some common reading, from a list drawn up by the seminar leader 
in consultation with the Fellows; and that each Fellow will also prepare a 
curriculum unit on a related subject for use in his or her own classroom. 
Since the stages of the units in preparation also provide part of the 
agenda for seminar discussions, the double aim of "subject matter" and 
"pedagogical application" is clearly located at the very center of the 
process.</p>
<p>Any seminar on ways of approaching, interpreting, and using drama in the 
classroom--or, for that matter, on the teaching of writing--will 
necessarily blur the dualism of these convenient assumptions. Indeed, it is 
probably true that, at bottom, no "subject matter" is ever really separable 
from the procedures that have established it or the pedagogy through which 
it is transmitted. In any case, what we needed for our seminar was both a 
body of common reading and some common immersion in practical activities. 
It seemed to me that, insofar as possible, the seminar should incorporate 
on an adult level a direct experiencing of the co-operative reading and 
learning that the Fellows might then begin to introduce in appropriate ways 
into their own classrooms. There would be, of course, some necessary 
limitations. Because the writing of the curriculum units would proceed in 
specified stages concurrently with the seminar activities, any additional 
writing assignments would have to be quite brief. And the seminar sessions 
themselves should make ample room for presentations by the Fellows of 
material or activities related to their own on-going projects.</p>
<p>The aim of the seminar could be stated simply: to lead adults toward an 
understanding of scripts as "scores" for performance, and to facilitate 
their preparation of units designed either to lead their own students 
toward fuller understanding of drama or to employ drama as a means toward 
some other curricular goal. The group ought to be organized as far as 
practicable, I thought, both as a seminar in "co-operative reading" and as 
a beginning ensemble company. Sessions might include some lecture, but more 
readings and discussion, and a fairly steady involvement in theatre games 
and exercises, as well as regular presentations or pedagogical initiatives 
by the Fellows themselves. The main work together ought to provide a 
variety of bases for the most likely spin-offs that the Fellows would be 
interested in developing.</p>
<p>The Fellows in our Institute seminar rather strenuously resisted some of 
my suggestions for common reading and initial overtures in the direction of 
ensemble work. They wanted to spend much more of the time on their own 
presentations. It seems to me now that the seminar requires somewhat 
stronger leadership than I chose to exercise on that occasion--and a fuller 
commitment to group work. I would still, however, want the Fellows 
themselves to be responsible for introducing a fairly large proportion of 
the seminar's activity. One possible outline for the ten sessions would 
incorporate elements of story theatre, theatre games, drama concerned with 
ethnic and family themes, Shakespeare, and modern responses to Shakespeare. 
My experience with Fellows of the Institute certainly suggested that 
exploration in all these directions would be likely. The sequence might be 
plotted out as follows:</p>
<p><b>Session 1</b> Organizational meeting. Introduction of the seminar's aims. 
Negotiation of a list of readings and activities.</p>
<p><b>Session 2:</b> Finding the action. Approaches to Edward Albee's <i>The Zoo 
Story</i>. Preliminary discussion of the shape and meaning of the play, 
bringing out opposed views and moving toward at least a partial consensus. 
Then a testing of the value of that consensus, and an inevitable re-opening 
of the questions it had provisionally answered, through attempts to 
approach that shape and meaning in group readings, with roles assumed by 
various Fellows. (Granville-Barker provides a fairly detailed description 
of the dialectical stages in this process.) Introduction here of the notion 
of the script as "score": subtext, non-verbal action, cues for performance. 
(J.L. Styan's introductory approach would be very helpful.)</p>
<p><b>Session 3:</b> Theatre games and improvisational theatre. Exercises as ways of 
approaching the dramatic, as distinct from the merely verbal, substance of 
a play. Work with some parts of Viola Spolin's <i>Improvisation for the 
Theatre</i>. Consideration of Paul Sills' <i>Story Theater</i>.</p>
<p>In sessions 4-9, the seminar would regularly include some work with 
theatre exercises, and also presentations or pedagogical initiatives by one 
or two Fellows. Beyond that, the attention would be on different kinds of 
drama and different ways of approaching or using the plays in the English 
or foreign-language classroom.</p>
<p><b>Session 4:</b> Leroi Jones' <i>Dutchman</i>. Theatre games and exercises as 
a way of approaching a dramatic situation. Because Lila in <i>Dutchman 
</i>is playing a version of "Who Game," and because radical transformations 
in dramatic mode and character behavior are central to that play, one might 
lead up to it through such exercises (described by Spolin and Pasolli) as 
"Passing and Receiving," "Imaginary Objects," "Who Game," and 
"Transformation and Relationship."</p>
<p><b>Session 5:</b> Arthur Miller's <i>A View from the Bridge</i>. The issues 
engaged by plays that focus on family relationships and ethnic groups. 
Fictive autobiographies written by the students--and by the Fellows here, 
if possible--as a way of approaching their assigned roles.</p>
<p><b>Session 6:</b> Lorraine Hansberry's <i>A Raisin in the Sun</i>. The issues 
engaged by black drama. Helene Kevssar's <i>The Curtain and the Veil: 
Strategies in Black Drama</i> might provide several ways into this subject. 
Improvised scenes as way of approaching a play's subtexts.</p>
<p><b>Session 7:</b> Shakespeare's <i>Macbeth</i>. Exercises for use in the English 
class: approaches to the reading of dramatic poetry; in-class rehearsal 
techniques; improvisation and translation as means of finding the action; 
written exercises that expand the script toward an imagined 
performance--from brief amplifications of "intention" and "subtext," to 
full "staging papers," as Miriam Gilbert of the University of Iowa taught 
me to call them.</p>
<p><b>Session 8:</b> Ionesco's <i>Macbett</i>. Modern responses to Shakespeare. 
Tragedy transformed into parodic and satirical farce. Finding a "playable 
style" for a script. Ways of employing drama in the foreign-language 
class.</p>
<p><b>Session 9:</b> Stoppard's <i>Dogg's Hamlet</i>, <i>Cahoot's Macbeth</i>. 
Theatre games and "gibberish" exercises as the basis for a play. Possible 
digression on the wide-ranging theatrical, educational, and community 
activities of Ed Berman's Inter-Action in London, for which Stoppard wrote 
this play. Further uses of parody and pastiche. Shakespeare and political 
topicality.</p>
<p><b>Session 10:</b> Final discussion of the Fellows' drafts for curriculum 
units.</p>
<p>Any such plan, I continue to believe, should be negotiated at the 
outset in order to accommodate as many of the Fellows' special needs and 
interests as possible. One could easily imagine substitutions for the plays 
listed. The Zoo Story and Dutchman are useful at early points because of 
their focus on two characters and their transformation of the realistic 
mode in which they seem to begin. But any two-character play might work 
here, and an adequately prepared group might be encouraged to engage 
Pinter's The Dumbwaiter or Strindberg's Miss Julie or Genet's The Maids. 
Questions of family relationships might be broached through Miller's Death 
of a Salesman, Tennessee Williams' The Glass Menagerie, or--at another 
level--Paul Zindel's The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds. 
Ethnic issues might be engaged through a series of short plays by Hispanic 
authors for high school students, as collected in Octavio Romano's Chicano 
Drama, or through Alice Childress' collection of individual scenes from 
modern black theatre, Black Scenes. The session on black drama might go on 
to engage Ed Bullins' In the Wine Time or Ntozake Shange's For Colored 
Girls Who have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf. The sequence on 
Shakespeare and his descendants could just as easily begin with Hamlet, 
move to Ibsen's Ghosts or Chekhov's The Sea Gull, and culminate in Pavel 
Kohout's Poor Murderer, or Charles Marowitz's collage Hamlet, or Stoppard's 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead. Of course, with each 
substitution--and many others would be possible--a somewhat different range 
of issues would come into focus. Some substitutions would raise special 
problems of dramatic interpretation: choreographed poetry in For Colored 
Girls, Pirandellian ambiguity and expressionistic form in Poor Murderer, 
collage in the Marowitz. And no doubt each could provide suggestions for a 
somewhat different curricular emphasis in the middle or secondary 
school.</p>
<p>Nor would I want to preclude a session or two devoted to some other kind 
of activity that might meet the group's needs. One of our own most valuable 
sessions arose indirectly from my being invited to Hillhouse High School, 
where I sat in on the English class taught by one of the Fellows, joined 
her in an impromptu reading of Macbeth, I, vii, and then attended a school 
program prepared by the high school drama club. The program was excellent, 
and I was delighted when the Fellow at Hillhouse arranged to have those 
young black actors recast it for our seminar. It consisted of the first 
half of The Zoo Story followed by the students' own collective 
composition--a "rap" version of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs 
choreographed with the help of their drama teacher. That demonstration and 
our ensuing discussion with the students and their teacher did much to 
convince the seminar Fellows of the applicability to their own curricular 
situations of Albee's play and Spolin's theatre games.</p>
<hr/>
<p>As might be predicted, the interests of the Fellows in our seminar were 
quite various, and their curriculum units ranged widely in topic and 
approach. One, by a Fellow who had prepared a unit on Shakespeare the 
previous year, dealt with the teaching of Marlowe's Doctor Faustus to high 
school seniors--a formidable task concerning which I was glad to receive 
some enlightenment. Another unit focused on images of black women in 
drama--with scripts by Langston Hughes, Lorraine Hansberry, Charlie 
Russell, Ntozake Shange, Ed Bullins, and others, and supplementary material 
drawn from poetry. Another unit, by a former teacher of German who was now 
shifting to English, dealt with the uses of improvisation, play-making, and 
dramatic presentation in the teaching of basic language skills. Yet another 
dealt with script-writing as a means through which to teach various 
elements of effective writing. One, by a supervisor of bilingual education, 
concerned the uses of drama in classes for English as a Second Language. 
One dealt with ways of leading students into a study of "The Family on 
Stage." And two units dealt in quite different ways with drama as a means 
of focusing adolescent problems of personal relationships and 
self-definition. Despite their variety, all of the units incorporated to an 
important degree the use of theatre games and exercises, improvisation, and 
the presenting of cuttings from plays. The aspect of our seminar work that 
the Fellows most frequently chose to omit, as they translated its concerns 
into their own curricular settings, was the analytical approach to dramatic 
form. That fact may reflect some inadequacy in my own presentation of such 
material; but it's also possible that another group of Fellows might 
demonstrate a rather different sense of educational priorities.</p>
<p>Because the curriculum units were prepared in stages as the seminar 
proceeded, with frequent opportunities for conference with the seminar 
leader and discussions with other Fellows, the process of writing bulked 
larger in our work than any outline of sessions might suggest. Indeed, some 
Fellows obviously found the writing of such a unit a rather formidable 
challenge. That's not surprising, and it has little to do with our specific 
topic. Consider what may be an extreme case: If one has been educated 
mainly by way of textbooks and lectures, with achievement determined by 
multiple-choice or short-answer examinations, and if one's own teaching has 
proceeded in a similar manner, one may well be a bit daunted by the task of 
defining a topic, narrowing it to manageable size, giving it specific 
development, and translating it into a series of activities or tasks for 
the classroom. Though the seminar's designated topic was "drama," its 
centrally agonizing and rewarding activity was often "writing." That fact, 
inherent in any liberal education worthy of the name, should have its own 
beneficial secondary effects upon the future teaching done by the seminar's 
Fellows.</p>
<p>In the early stages of their formulation, these curriculum units 
benefited greatly from discussion among the Fellows themselves. The 
professional life of the teacher in a middle or secondary school is often 
one of acute intellectual isolation. The opportunity to discuss common 
problems with one's peers may provoke a more valuable kind of learning than 
any direction provided by the seminar leader. I now think it might be 
useful to capitalize on that fact more fully than we managed to do in our 
seminar, by providing some early experiments in collaborative writing as 
well as some carefully controlled occasions for peer-criticism and editing 
of late drafts.</p>
<p>To say this, however, is to return by another route to the theme of 
Granville-Barker's proposal. Essentially the opportunity before us is the 
improvement of teaching and the enhancement of learning at both the college 
and pre-college levels through some adventures in collaboration: among 
institutions, among teachers from different educational settings, and among 
a diverse group of learners. The collaborative art of drama, threatened 
elsewhere by economic pressures and by competition from film and 
television, might find here an appropriately educational role. It would be 
the role that, two generations ago, Granville-Barker had wanted it to 
play.</p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>