---
layout: "page"
title: "Teaching in America: On Batting .667: Three Courses for the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute"
path: "/pubs/A4/winks.html"
---
<main>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<hr/>
<h2 align="CENTER">On Batting .667: Three Courses for the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</h2>
<p align="CENTER"><big>by Robin W. Winks</big></p>
<p>Despite a widely-held public stereotype, New York City's taxi 
drivers are not more talkative than drivers in any other city: they all 
ask silent, single passengers some equivalent of the question, "What do you 
do for a living, buddy?" Even when it was not the whole truth, I have 
invariably replied that I teach history. In London, New York, and all 
points east and west, a moment of silence follows, and then: "I studied 
history once in school. Hated it. It was my worst subject." The rest of the 
journey is in silence, followed by an over-generous tip in compensation for 
belonging to a guilty fraternity.</p>
<p>Why do so many people hate, or at best react with boredom, to 
history? Possibly because the subject is too frequently poorly taught, 
because many people assume that History is simply a collection of facts 
about the past and may, therefore, be handed to the coach to teach in spare 
time, since the teacher need only be a book ahead of the students. Perhaps 
because it is a boring subject. Perhaps because American students have been 
lobotomized by television and expect the instant gratification of a 
definitive answer to every complex question, which the wise teacher will 
not provide. Perhaps because history is book-intensive and requires the 
application of a skill not invariably well learned in school. Perhaps none 
of this is true.</p>
<p>What is true is that History is taught very differently in college than 
before college, that the gap between the two levels of instruction is 
enormous as it relates to content (though not necessarily even present when 
it relates to the talent of the teacher), and that we have too long 
misunderstood what students have meant when they have asked that History be 
made "relevant." The impression is strong, though perhaps not quantified, 
that high school students who come to college expecting to major in History 
soon shift to another subject, and that History gains its largest number of 
majors from those who did not consider the subject as central to their 
interests in high school. If this is so, why should it be so? By 
indirection and perhaps without intent, the Yale-New Haven Teachers 
Institute has, through allowing me three times to teach in its program, 
provided me with some guesses.</p>
<p>The easy answer is one teachers have known all along: history in the 
high or middle school is taught largely as a body of facts to be memorized 
while at the university level History is taught as a body of thought over 
which one argues. Such a view draws an excessive and therefore false 
division, of course: all well-taught high school courses in History try to 
induce argument and originality on the part of students, and all 
college-level courses must contain an irreducible commitment to retaining 
factual data before beginning the argument. Still, the popular view is too 
close to the truth.</p>
<p>What ought History to teach, without regard to the level at which it is 
taught? Minimally the following ought to be involved:</p>
<p>Leading students to see that ideas and actions have consequences in four 
arenas. These are the arenas of economics, politics, society, and ideas 
broadly (sometimes called "intellectual history" and embracing, of course, 
religion and popular culture). There is no question one may ask that does 
not require that a portion of its answer derive from each of these arenas. 
There is no social problem that develops and cries out for a solution that 
has not arisen in part from conditions best analyzed in one of these 
arenas. That the simplest of actions have consequences is a truism to any 
adult, though few adolescents grasp the point without examples.</p>
<p>Spending my days in an environment filled with the young, I entertain in 
my mind a series of experiences I label "Close Encounters on the Campus." 
Two of these are illustrative. One day some years ago I was struck from 
behind by a bicyclist riding the wrong way on a one-way street, pinned 
against a car, and had two ribs broken. This was a few weeks after 
returning from a year in Southeast Asia during which, among other 
excitements, I and my family had been evacuated from the Saigon airport 
while it was under fire and had spent the night in a downtown Saigon hotel 
the day before it was fire-bombed. My only injury that year came on the 
safety of the Yale campus, because a graduate student did not think that 
one-way signs applied to him, and because I thought myself back in an 
orderly society.</p>
<p>Two years later, ribs mended, I rounded a great cabinet in the 
University's library, in hot pursuit of more citations from the card 
catalogue, and ran at full-speed into a simple wooden tray that had been 
left thrust out by another researcher equally concerned with his time, his 
ego, and his pace. Hitting the tray, I broke again the same ribs and this 
time was hospitalized. The student (or faculty member?) who had no time to 
thrust the tray back into its niche also had no time apparently to think 
about the simplest consequence of that action. Perhaps in the end President 
Carter's ill-advised rescue mission to the hostages of Iran failed because 
one mechanic aboard an aircraft carrier failed to properly adjust one sand 
screen on one helicopter. Here, surely, the four great arenas came home to 
Americans with a vengeance, enormous consequences arising from the easiest 
(and least excusable) of mistakes.</p>
<p>Students are, in fact, "doing history" whenever they pause for a moment 
to think about consequences. If this makes history philosophy teaching by 
example, why not?</p>
<p>Whenever one asks what History ought to teach, one sounds pompous to the 
lay audience, for teachers of chemistry, physics, or physical education are 
presumed to know what they ought to teach. But history teachers ask this 
question constantly, if often in code language: What good is History? How 
do we make History relevant? How do we get from our own sense that History 
is important for the public good to the goal of showing students how this 
is so? Soon one is reduced to sounding preachy, didactic, egoistic, as I 
have just done, because for most teachers of History the subject is deeply 
internalized while most taxi drivers reasonably enough think of the subject 
as the most objective, external, unpersonalized subject there is. 
Chemistry, they know, kills; History does too, but how?</p>
<p>Thus, one is in fact teaching values, and once this is admitted, an even 
more ponderous subject has escaped from pandora's box. Ought one to teach 
values? Of course, we do it all the time. Then whose values and for what 
end? The historian's values. And what are they?</p>
<p>History does, of course, also teach certain skills, though too often 
teachers at all levels are reluctant to illustrate the genuine utility of 
these skills. The student of history can learn how to recognize sequences 
of cause and effect, to see that cause A led to effect B, and that cause C 
is more remote, though not unimportant. That is to say, History teaches 
logic, clear-thinking, and an awareness not only of consequences but of 
responsibilities. Here too is a trap most teachers see, and in seeing it 
may prefer to avoid the course entirely: for in the minds of many, cause 
equates with responsibility and responsibility equates with guilt, until 
History becomes a mere vehicle for grievance collecting by a self-aware 
group with its own program for the future. Yet can we afford not to play 
the course merely because it contains many traps?</p>
<p>History may also help young people to understand that causality has its 
own priorities: that A is more than B, though B may be more proximate in 
time to effect C. Slowly a student may be led to see the inter-relatedness 
of all things, to truly understand what John Donne meant by the statement 
so many like to quote, though they so often mean nothing more than a simple 
social affirmation against personal loneliness. Seeing themselves and their 
environment whole, acquiring the skills by which they may decode that 
environment, these are among the goals of History. Even an awareness that 
all human beings act under time constraints--that History is, in the final 
analysis, about Time in action--is valuable, as in the set examination in 
which the student must not only make choices within minutes but is also 
reflecting choices made over days and weeks before: to study or not to 
study. Educators say that they seek subjects that will give students a 
sense of cohesion, of their relationship to the past and therefore to the 
future, of how school provides skills in abstract thought, even a sense of 
duty to community, to something outside oneself. Surely History does 
this.</p>
<p>Of course, we must not oversell the social utility of History. In 
college it is easy enough to demonstrate that the History major is the 
commonest path to law school, or that the ability to detect cause and 
effect relationships is indispensable in business or government, or that an 
emotional adaptation to the reality of time constraints is essential to 
excellence in virtually all sports. But in the high or middle school, it 
may be only in metaphor that History leads the student to dig a deeper 
furrow.</p>
<p>It was with these convictions, concerns, and large areas of ignorance 
that I constructed three courses over two years for the Yale-New Haven 
Teachers Institute. To these presumptuous notions about History were added 
the expectation that I would act essentially as a resource person, working 
with individuals far more knowledgeable than I about the realities of the 
classroom--that is, that I should provide insights into subject matter 
while my colleagues, the Fellows of the Institute, would instruct me and 
each other in the methods of teaching: in translating "insight" into 
reality. This proved to be true, for I gained new insights into my own 
material just as the teachers found, in their interaction, new ways to 
present familiar materials as well as new materials for the presenting. 
Genuine collegiality, a sense of learning together, with no dominant figure 
summing up "what is really true" at the end of the day, meant that the 
learning process left the seminar room with the teachers, and this teacher, 
after every meeting. As with a final examination, which should never look 
backwards over work done but should propel the student forward into new 
thought, as an extension rather than a recapitulation of a course of study, 
the seminar experience, when it worked, demonstrated that the classroom 
provides only one of many strategies to learning. The experience worked, I 
thought, two times out of three.</p>
<hr/>
<p>The three seminars which I taught deliberately took three different 
approaches to knowledge, to teaching, and to the sociology of learning. The 
first, which was on new trends in British history and literature, sought to 
demonstrate that a comparative approach to a body of knowledge was 
especially productive and exciting. The second, on the use of the modern 
detective and spy novel in history and literature classrooms, sought to 
explore the methods of the historian in a novel context. The third, on the 
widespread notion found in modern history and literature that the West is 
in decline, attempted to use an area studies approach to explore a specific 
problem in Western thought. Inter alia, the three seminars were meant to 
see how comparative studies, methodological inquiry, and "post-holing" (to 
use now outdated terminology) of a "relevant issue" would lead to reshaped 
lesson plans, more excited teachers, and more enthusiastic students. The 
participants would have their own views as to success; for myself, the 
first two succeeded and the third did not. Exploring why may be 
instructive.</p>
<p>"An Interdisciplinary Approach to British Studies" was designed to 
provide teachers in various disciplines with ammunition when a student 
complained that the teacher was straying outside the bounds of the 
discipline. How many history students complain when a teacher corrects 
their grammar, that This isn't an English course? How many students of 
literature complain, having indulged their fancies in creative writing 
techniques, and been corrected by a teacher for an error in historical 
logic, that This isn't History? We read a novel, therefore, though as 
History: John Fowles' <i>The French Lieutenant's Woman</i>. We read 
History, therefore, but as Literature, to recognize truly great writing: 
G.M. Young's <i>Portrait of an Age</i>. We constantly compared British 
literature and American history to history and literature to ask, what is 
different about this material? What characteristics does it have, other 
than having been written by a citizen of one country, that makes it 
distinctly British as opposed to American? What elements in such history 
and literature relate to the modern adolescent's concerns? The individual 
projects range from pop art and the mass media, through the industrial 
revolution that induced both, to a re-examination of a classic set piece of 
British literature, Thomas Hardy's <i>The Return of the Native</i>.</p>
<p>For myself, two imperatives guided the course. The first was that a 
comparative approach to any study of cultures, whether through history, 
literature, art, or indeed manual training, was more productive of true 
understanding than an isolated study could possibly be. To study only 
American history and literature is not to know American history or 
literature, for to understand a national culture one must grasp its 
elements of uniqueness. Yet how can one know what is unique without 
comparing one culture with another? Thus whenever the subject was most 
clearly British, I sought in discussion to make it most consciously 
American. In what different ways did literature perceive of and explain 
World War II? How did British and American engineering interact in the 
specific case study of the development of more powerful cannon? What 
romantic visions arise in either society from the notion of "the 
pirate"?--the pirate of the South Seas, the pirate of Robert Louis 
Stevenson, the pirate and robber baron of finance? In what ways did two 
Western societies respond to a common encounter with a non-Western culture, 
China?</p>
<p>Too often our curricula, in college as well as high school, have been 
organized around national identities, as though the rise of the nation 
state was the singular purpose of the historical process. This unconscious 
acceptance of the materialistic dialectic is writ large in our school 
catalogues: a History of England, a History of Russia, a History of the 
United States from Colonial Times to the Civil War, a History of the United 
States in the Twentieth Century, and more recently, a History of Africa or 
a History of the Middle East. Even in these titles rests a Western bias of 
which students are seldom made aware, for anyone who speaks of the history 
of the Near East, Middle East, or Far East, is using a nineteenth century 
conception of a globe dominated from England. After all, these great world 
regions are near, middle, and far only in relation to western Europe: the 
Far East is, in fact, due west of most Americans, and it is for most 
Australians (even as they continue to use the European terminology) 
actually the near North. More subtly, behind the notion that the nation 
state is the best receptacle for the collecting and analyzing of historical 
data rests a crippling fallacy: that historical problems must be conceived 
of within the political confines of a single nation and that those problems 
may best be solved within the same confines. When stated in this way the 
premise is obviously nonsense. One can understand the history of one 
country only when it is compared and contrasted with that of another. 
Students may understand History as a process that effects their lives only 
if the history taught them is not simply a recitation of national triumphs 
(or national tragedies), if it is not a vehicle for either grievance 
collection or the attribution of all guilt to others.</p>
<p>The second imperative was that to study History one must read 
literature. The reverse proposition seemed less urgent, since few high 
schools have been more than brushed by the isolating tendencies of the 
structuralists. Rather, comparing novels that seemed unready for comparison 
was a better path to this imperative. Thus we discussed how Melville's 
<i>Moby Dick</i> had done for American literature what Thomas Mann's 
<i>Magic Mountain</i> would do for German, and we explored how Walter van 
Tilberg Clark's allegedly more minor novel, <i>The Track of the Cat</i>, 
was a clear transference of Melville's themes to a Rocky Mountain 
landscape. We could then discuss whether students "should" read <i>Moby 
Dick</i> because it would enlarge a few while being incomprehensible to 
most, or because, quite simply, it was a crowning point of American 
literature, an American icon at which all should worship, or whether it 
would teach style in writing and subtlety in reading, or whether--because 
at base it is a rattling good yarn--it ought to be taught for pure 
pleasure. We concluded, of course, that for different levels any one of 
these justifications was appropriate. We also concluded that most of these 
"shoulds" could be equally well fulfilled by <i>Track of the Cat</i>, with 
a virtually exponential increase in the odds that students would actually 
read it to the end. And thus we were brought to a discussion of "standards" 
in education.</p>
<p>The seminar served its purpose, perhaps because there were no hidden 
agendas. We sought to discover again the seamless web while realizing once 
more that in the end all of human life is also utterly unique. We 
discovered that we each knew something the other needed to know. And we 
discovered new ways by which we could let our students in on this 
secret.</p>
<p>The second seminar was both more ambitious and more direct, as it sought 
to examine "Society and the Detective Novel." It began with the premise 
that our society had not endowed detective novels with the merit badges of 
the established "classics"--that <i>Silas Manner </i>was still thought, 
perhaps for valid reasons, to be a "better" book than <i>Roger 
Ackroyd</i>--and that in part for this reason good readers devoured them by 
the thousands. Those taxi drivers speak to me of Robert Ludlum while I wait 
for the child in the cradle to lisp in Greek. The course set out to find 
detective, mystery, and spy novels with contemporary settings which could 
be brought into the classroom and be demonstrated to possess the same 
elements that had rendered the classics worthy of study. We also often 
discussed whether a detective novel might enable the teacher to bring into 
the open in classroom discussion a subject otherwise thought taboo. We 
concluded that on the whole it could not, but in reaching this conclusion 
we all learned something more about how society constrains open 
discussion.</p>
<p>The second premise was more directly mine: that one could teach students 
the actual methods of the historian, and thus appreciation for history as a 
subject of complex study based on reasoning rather than memorization, by 
showing how the historian functioned as a detective. To this end, novels 
were chosen which illustrated the basic methods of the historian as imposed 
on a fictional detective. We all agreed that this worked well.</p>
<p>To take the second premise first, what are the steps imposed upon the 
historian by the constraints of his method and by the demand for honesty? 
First, one must define the subject: is it the coming of war? the abolition 
of slavery? the role of George Washington in founding the nation? the 
influence of the frontier movement in American life? Having defined the 
subject, one must learn how to ask the Right Question: that is, a question 
capable of receiving an answer, and in itself interesting, significant, and 
open to genuine investigation. Historical questions must be capable of 
interpretation, not be limited to a statement of fact, not be tendentious, 
and be open to an answer within the lifetime of the researcher (or the time 
given the student for writing a paper). Knowing how to ask the question one 
actually wishes to ask is difficult for most people, and it is especially 
so for adolescents whose questions arise as much from emotion as from 
reason. What, then, is a Right Question? One capable of an answer, though 
not necessarily only one answer.</p>
<p>The historian must then find the evidence or which to base an answer. 
This requires an understanding of what logic, society, and one's intuition 
take "evidence" to be. This requires legwork, imagination, persistence, and 
sometimes good fortune. Having found the evidence, one must evaluate it, to 
find within the body of data its variety of meanings, the operable truths 
that arise from the data, the relevant meaning for the question asked. And 
then the historian, as teacher or writer, must go on to organize the 
evidence in a coherent manner for presentation to others, and convey that 
evidence through article, book, lecture, seminar. In the end one may have 
set the record straight on a matter of some importance; one may have 
decoded the environment just that bit more; one may have even, though 
usually by implication, showed someone what to do in a given situation, how 
to confront a moral dilemma, how actions and ideas have consequences beyond 
the expected and wanted. One will, in fact, have revealed the healthy 
tension that influences us all as we move between the exact and the 
unknown. We will also have learned that order, factual accuracy, a sense of 
cause and effect, and an eye for detail matter in our daily lives.</p>
<p>These are not inconsequential matters to learn. Disciplines other than 
History can teach them. History must teach them if it is to have the 
relevance so often granted to the melange of courses bearing titles, all of 
which are variations on "Some Things You Should Know about How the World 
Works before You Go Out into It" (or, Creek and Paddle 101a: Civics and 
Social Responsibility). These are matters that assuredly can be learned by 
application through a well-wrought urn of a detective novel, for the 
mystery is "solved," the clues are "decoded," through precisely the same 
steps. <i>Clue</i>, after all, is simply an ancient Greek word for the ball 
of twine which the Athenian prince Theseus carried with him as he descended 
into the great Cretan Labyrinth, in search of the Minotaur. Tying one end 
of the thread (or <i>clew</i>) to the doorpost of the Labyrinth, Theseus 
played it out behind him as he went into the depths. After killing the 
Minotaur, he followed the twine back to the surface to claim Ariadne in 
triumph. When we "prepare" students for life, when we seek to help our 
students acquire skills, when we speak of decoding the environment, are we 
not referring to just such a clue?</p>
<p>Thus the seminar read twenty-three books. All agreed that at least four 
of these were "classics" of literature as the conventional wisdom would 
define the term, except for the element of age. All agreed that they taught 
the methodology of history by example. All found how, through the trends so 
apparent in such fiction, one could read the shifting paranoia of society. 
All found at least three books they were determined to take into the 
classroom. For the developmental reader, some found books that would excite 
them with the act of reading itself. For the relatively sophisticated 
reader, others found additional good fare on which they could feed. For the 
historian, one found how the textbook itself was an artifact of culture and 
suggested means by which students might interrogate the text. For the 
teacher of a foreign language, one found another door into the acute 
problems of understanding a culture through translation. All had a good 
time, the instructor most of all.</p>
<p>What problem might one examine in detective fiction? In consultation, 
the group choose eleven. We began with an attempt to define what it is in 
life and literature that frightens, mystifies, and instructs. We all read 
one novel, Geoffrey Household's <i>Dance of the Dwarfs</i>, which was found 
universally applicable in the classroom: compelling, well-written, 
thoughtful, and above all, forcing the reader to think again about 
conventional definitions of literature. We moved on to categorization: that 
is, what is a mystery? a detective novel? a spy story? a thriller? And then 
we explored forbidden territory: ethnicity, sexuality, even homosexuality 
in American life. In P.D. James's <i>An Unsuitable Job for a Woman</i> we 
explored why society assumes that the work of a detective is unsuitable for 
a woman. Was society speaking to its conventional concept of a woman's 
work? or of the detective? or of crime? or of modes of thought? James, we 
concluded, was a major novelist, not "merely" a writer of detective novels. 
This was week four, and the seminar never looked back.</p>
<p>In the end we tangled with the hardest question of all: What is justice? 
Civics courses teach about justice; truly able detective fiction will 
demonstrate justice in all its ambiguities. To young people in our society, 
wishing to identify a "hero," the complex way in which the heroic differs 
from time to time and from culture to culture is one of the most 
frustrating moral challenges a teacher may perceive. Is the person who sees 
justice done a "hero"? What then is the hero? We ended our inquiry aware of 
a body of untapped literature which may better serve the <i>literary </i>as 
well as the moral ends once served by asking our students to read <i>Silas 
Marner</i>, as we discovered how Dorothy Sayers, Dante scholar, could 
combine <i>Marner</i> and <i>Mill on the Floss</i> in a far more 
compelling, indeed far more complex, moral allegory about human 
responsibility, guilt, and cause, the dangerous triumvirate associated by 
the lay reader with History. In <i>The Nine Tailors</i>, as in the wit and 
irony of Rex Stout, we found the purposes of both history and literature 
served.</p>
<p>"Relevance" is, I have concluded, best demonstrated through the 
comparative approach to knowledge, and through the presentation of the 
methods of historian and literary critic in a context that will demonstrate 
the elements of skill and practical application that arise. The third 
seminar, "An Unstable World: The West in Decline," produced papers no less 
good, contained Fellows no less committed, and gave rise to discussions no 
less lively, than the two seminars that preceded it. Nonetheless, it did 
not achieve its purpose, for in the end we had no fuller understanding of 
what it is that we mean when we say that the "West is in decline," no more 
far-ranging ammunition with which to combat such a view, and no greater 
awareness of how history, literature, or the industrial arts may interact 
in pursuit of the same goals. The fault was mine, and it arose, I think, 
from the decision to focus on "a problem." Unless students perceive "a 
problem" to be <i>their </i>problem, it is no problem. Unless students 
recognize that acid rain poses a problem for them, their interest in the 
environment, for example, is likely to be academic in the truest sense of 
the word. What was found to be true in the first seminar defeated the 
third: too many students still think in the context of national identities, 
in terms of OPEC-inspired hostilities, Japanese competition, Soviet 
intransigence. These perceptions are not incorrect, but if one caters to 
them as a teaching strategy one has defeated the goals demonstrated (and 
achieved) in the first two seminars: one does not provide students with an 
understanding of general principles, so that unhappily they may conclude, 
as the taxi driver did conclude, that History seemed to be but "one damn 
thing after another."</p>
<p>Of course, the notion of "decline" is itself rooted in Western culture. 
It partakes of the biological fallacy; that nations are like organisms, 
that they are born, mature, decline, and die. Cultures that assume such a 
sequence to be true of nations must also believe that the society either 
grows or decays: that one must be expanding or shrinking, aggressor or 
aggressed-upon, exploiter or exploited, in an economy of growth or of 
recession. Such an assumption feeds upon the conventional wisdom derived 
from the four arenas in which the historian operates: the economic, 
political, social, and intellectual. The very notion that a society may be 
in decline is more untouchable in the publicly supported classroom than a 
discussion of sexuality may be. The notion of decline, for any society, is 
based on a nineteenth century convention of thought so deeply rooted (to 
retain the biological metaphor) that it may not be approached through 
interdisciplinary inquiry. It was not, in the end, at this time and for the 
purposes of energizing and exciting the students to new inquiries about 
themselves, the Right Question. Thus seminar two taught seminar three, and 
all taught the instructor, the truth of a long-recognized historical 
position: since people are motivated by what they believe to be true, the 
most important study for the historian, the most significant subject for 
the teacher, and the most enjoyable subject for the student, is about what 
people <i>believe </i>to be true.</p>
<p>The third seminar, then, was not a failure: indeed, it was a success, 
for it returned all its participants back upon the most fundamental of 
historical and literary inquiries--how do we come to believe what we 
believe? The instructor batted no home runs, though there was many a 
three-base hit among the curriculum units prepared by the Fellows. One 
reminded us of the problem of the modern mercenary in society (and by 
extension, of the presence of .he terrorist), for <i>soldier</i>, after 
all, derives from <i>solidus</i>, Latin for "piece of money." Another 
reminded us of how African literature in English may open up the continent 
of Africa to American students. Two others examined the visual arts, and 
how students be taught to see, not merely to look. And the instructor 
learned how to give the taxi driver a better answer: not "I teach history" 
but "I teach historians"--for every teacher, whether of art, shop, or 
literature, was his or her own historian.</p>
<p>Batting .667 seemed alright, once we realized this.</p>
<hr/>
<p><small>[ <a href=".\">Back to the Table of Contents</a> ]</small></p>
<p><small><a href="..\..\">Main Page</a> : <a href="..\">Periodical Publications and Books</a> : Teaching in America: The Common Ground</small></p>
</main>