---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 83.01.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1983/1/83.01.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Looking At History Through Architecture"
unitAuthor: "Patricia Gaffney Ansel"
keywords: "New Haven Connecticut American Architecture History"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 6th grade Connecticut History and 6th through 8th grade Art"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 83.01.04:
</h4>
Looking at History through Architecture is designed to teach history through visual art.  The emphasis is on visual memory as a learning mode.  Visual arts activities are used for reinforcement.
<p>
The unit is divided into four sections:
</p>
<p>
I.  Colonial 1638-1820
</p>
<p>
A.  Description of life in the developing colony. B.  Description of Colonial architecture which includes Georgian (1735-1790) and Federal (1790-1820). C.  Fourteen slides—numbered and described in chronological order. D.  Lesson Plans     1.  for use of slides and narrative to develop a time line.     2.  for activity to develop a mini community relief map, with follow-up discussion.    3.  to create a mural using slides to develop a visual time line. E.  Vocabulary words.
</p>
<p>
II.  Greek Revival 1820-1860 Early Victorian 1840-1860
</p>
<p>
A.  Description of life in New Haven during this period. B.  Description of Greek Revival and Early Victorian architecture. C.  Thirteen slides—numbered and described in chronological order. D.  Suggestions for activities.
</p>
<p>
III.  Late Victorian 1860-1900
</p>
<p>
A.  Description of life in New Haven during this period. B.  Description of Late Victorian architecture which includes Classical and Colonial Revival, Victorian Gothic, and Queen Anne styles. C.  Fifteen slides—numbered and described in chronological order. D.  Suggestions for discussions, fieldtrips and activities.
</p>
<p>
IV.  20th Century to Present A.  Description of life in New Haven during this period. B.  Description of 20th Century architecture. C.  Lesson Plan to develop a city-scape painting from sculpture.
</p>
<p>
Bibliography for teachers. Reading list for students.  Reading is not emphasized in this unit. The objectives include development and reinforcement of skills in observation and description.  The goal is for the student to gain an understanding of the on-going process we call history by presenting a general picture of that process in New Haven.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for 6th grade Connecticut History and 6th through 8th grade Art)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
New Haven Connecticut American Architecture History
</i>
</p>
</body>