---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1993/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1993/1/93.01.02.x.html">93.01.02</a> <br/> As students investigate various examples of classical architecture in New Haven, this unit uses the symbolic language of architecture to motivate pupils to develop their own one-act plays intertwining the symbolic language with the spoken. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/1/93.01.04.x.html">93.01.04</a> <br/> In this unit students examine some of the most elementary features of symbolic meaning in their immediate environment. Special emphasis is placed on the architecture of the neighborhood mosque with an eye toward the influence of Islamic religion upon Muslim art and architecture. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/1/93.01.05.x.html">93.01.05</a> <br/> The Domestic House is designed as an introductory study of architecture while giving students a link with which to understand themselves and other cultures. Students are allowed to build models of their homes along with a number of hands on activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/1/93.01.08.x.html">93.01.08</a> <br/> This unit takes a multi-disciplinary approach to examining the destruction of Tenochtitlan, an important event in the conquest of America. This unit features the building of a model of Tenochtitlan by the students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.01.x.html">93.02.01</a> <br/> This unit explores those characteristics that have made African American folktales from countries where French is spoken, different, yet similar to, those of other countries. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.02.x.html">93.02.02</a> <br/> To develop an understanding of commonality among people, this unit proposes the exploration of ourselves and others through the recurring themes and motifs of folktales. <br/> The unit looks at the function of tales within the West African, Haitian, and African American traditions. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.03.x.html">93.02.03</a> <br/> The goal of this unit is to make students aware of themes common among American Indian, European, Puerto Rican, African American, Hispanic, and Asian American folktales, especially universal themes praising the talents and strengths of potentially heroic common people. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.04.x.html">93.02.04</a> <br/> This unit combines the study of African folktales and African art. The students will study stories from West Africa, be introduced to cultural and religious beliefs, and then visit the Yale Art Gallery's African collection. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.05.x.html">93.02.05</a> <br/> By examining folklore pertinent to a Black and/or Puerto Rican population, this unit will also look at the geography, climate, and customs of different related cultures. Not restricted to Black and Puerto Rican students </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.06.x.html">93.02.06</a> <br/> This unit is based on European, African American, and African Folktales. In these tales the heros and heroines use their wits to stay alive and find happiness. The unit focuses on critical thinking, public speaking, and writing skills, and passes a self-empowering message to its students. </p>
<p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.08.x.html">93.02.08</a> <br/> Designed to be used in conjunction with the HBJ-Treasury of Literature, the selected African folktales can be used across the curriculum. The goal is to promote better listening, reading, speaking and writing skills through the use of African-American folktales. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.09.x.html">93.02.09</a> <br/> Designed as an introduction to the new school year and as an invitation to reluctant readers, this unit is divided into four thematic areas based on stories chosen for each. This non-traditional approach to reading and writing includes hands on activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.10.x.html">93.02.10</a> <br/> This unit focuses on Zora Neale Hurston's folktales from <i>Mules</i> <i>and</i> Men, a novel in which she portrays the culture of Eatonville, Florida as a world far removed from the students' life experiences today. Lessons intend to spark the students' interest and creativity. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.11.x.html">93.02.11</a> <br/> Designed for a self-contained classroom, this unit uses folktales as a means of expanding upon themes presented in the HBJ 5th grade reader: <i>Light</i> <i>up</i> <i>in</i> <i>the</i> Sky. The unit focuses primarily on African American, West Indian, Spanish American, and Native American tales. Could be modified for independent use. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/2/93.02.12.x.html">93.02.12</a> <br/> This unit contains several tales from the Puerto Rican oral tradition. The students are asked to analyze each story through character identification, the problem in the story, the setting, sequence of events and the solution of the problem. Various themes are also examined. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.01.x.html">93.03.01</a> <br/> This unit explores strategies and an array of activities for young children participating in school plays. The unit emphasizes the active participation of children using creative dramatics to create imaginary situations. The unit also contains recommended original plays written by the author. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.02.x.html">93.03.02</a> <br/> This eighteen week unit in literature and drama is an extension of the existing fourth grade curriculum in Greek Mythology for gifted classes. Specifically it aims to expose students to customs, beliefs, and values of African and Latin American cultures. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.03.x.html">93.03.03</a> <br/> Focusing on contemporary American society along with Asian and African cultures, this unit helps students build their knowledge and experiences in music by blending the areas of multicultural drama and music. Students will create and stage a play or musical. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.04.x.html">93.03.04</a> <br/> Elements of theater and traditional academic subjects are combined for language arts and reading classes. The author employs theater games, dance, scene study, improvisation, acting lessons, rehearsal, and folktales in an integrated approach. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.05.x.html">93.03.05</a> <br/> Designed to help develop self-awareness in adolescents, the unit focuses on three plays: <i>The</i> <i>Oxcart,</i> <i>And</i> <i>the</i> <i>Souls</i> <i>Shall</i> Dance, and <i>A</i> <i>Raisin</i> <i>in</i> <i>the</i> <i>Sun.</i> Emphasis is on both reading skills and dramatic activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.06.x.html">93.03.06</a> <br/> Developed to introduce students to the trials and triumphs of African and Japanese Americans, the unit makes use of self-esteem building, role playing, creative writing, and creative dramatics activities to reinforce the historical information provided. <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.07.x.html">93.03.07</a> <br/> This unit is intended to introduce students to the theater: how it was developed, the performers, how they receive training, and a look behind the scene at participants. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.09.x.html">93.03.09</a> <br/> Divided into four periods over a twenty week span, this unit uses established plays, theater games, and student adaptions to lead pupils to write their own scenes and eventually submit them into drama competition. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/3/93.03.10.x.html">93.03.10</a> <br/> This unit intends to capture and hold students' attention for a nine week period, beginning with a discourse on the history of Greek theater and moving through Medieval, Elizabethan, Modern, and Multicultural periods of theater. Active participation in oral reading, improvisation, directing, discussion, analysis, comparing, contrasting, and critiquing should actively involve students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.01.x.html">93.04.01</a> <br/> Students are given an opportunity to acquire knowledge about African Americans through photography. As one of the hands-on activities, students will be taught how to make cameras. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.02.x.html">93.04.02</a> <br/> Unique jewelry from various groups in Africa is the focus of this unit. Students will compare jewelry as it is related to life and culture in the Equatorial region, the Savannah, and the Sahara Desert. Students will be allowed to make their own "African-influenced" jewelry. <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.03.x.html">93.04.03</a> <br/> In "Our Images Make History," the history of Mexico through murals is explored along with the history of Chicanos in the United States. This interdisciplinary approach connects history with art. Students are provided with the skills necessary to create their own murals. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.04.x.html">93.04.04</a> <br/> Music is a motivator for most students. In this unit, "rap" and the "hip hop" subcultures will be examined. Correlation between American and Jamaican music will be analyzed. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.05.x.html">93.04.05</a> <br/> This unit compares and contrasts contributions to the Civil Rights Movement made by African Americans, Chicano Americans, and Native Americans. Lectures, videos, selected readings, oral discussions, role-playing, simulation games, dramatization, guest artists, and field trips to museums provide interesting activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.06.x.html">93.04.06</a> <br/> In this unit, the artistic cultures of Native Americans, Chicanos, and African Americans will be studied through dance, music, literature and visual arts. Besides gaining knowledge and a broader appreciation of the arts, this unit aims to increase self-esteem, along with an understanding of other minority groups. </p><p> <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.07.x.html">93.04.07</a> <br/> Through this unit students will examine the diversity of Greek and Israeli cultures. Special attention is given to artwork, cooking/foods, and recreational activities for each group. Various hands-on activities are implemented throughout the unit in both the cognitive and affective domain. </p><p> <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.08.x.html">93.04.08</a> <br/> Through this unit students will be able to understand the roles played by Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman as they are portrayed through the artistry of Jacob Lawrence. Students are encouraged to acquire greater awareness of African American history through Lawrence's paintings. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.09.x.html">93.04.09</a> <br/> In this unit the specific contributions of seven African American artists are examined to show how African American culture has influenced art history. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.10.x.html">93.04.10</a> <br/> “The Folks of Folk Art” is an in-depth look at those folk artists who have become known as "outsiders." Students will be introduced to a group of artists whose lifestyles have been different. Each student will be encouraged to create a masterpiece using self experience. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1993/4/93.04.11.x.html">93.04.11</a> <br/> In this unit five contemporary female minority artists and their achievements will be examined. A comparison and contrast of shared issues from across cultures will be implemented. </p>
</main>