---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 16.02.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2016/2/16.02.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Cuba! Identity Revealed through Cultural Connections"
unitAuthor: "Waltrina Dianne Kirkland-Mullins"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Developed for Social Studies/Language Arts/Social Development, grades 3-4; recommended for Social Studies/Language Arts/Social Development, grades 3-6"
---
<main>
<p>
Through what lens do we identify a nation, its leaders, and its people?  Can those of us outside of a select culture impartially examine and embrace a nation and its constituents through multiple lenses such that we objectively identify a country and its people—many of whose descendants live within American shores? How do we enlighten future generations to become thinkers who empathize, communicate, and interact with diverse cultures, ultimately helping them develop working relationships with diverse people within our country and ever-expanding global community? How can understanding identity and collective consciousness serve as a unifying force for a community, a nation, and the world?  By immersing students in hands-on research activities, engaging discourse with entrepreneurs and individuals from diverse cultures, and more, we can perhaps evoke positive change in this regards.  “Cuba!  Identity Revealed” serves as a proposed “discovery prototype” to achieve this end.  Using the country of Cuba as a springboard, young learners will go beyond textbook knowledge, media images, and sweeping generalizations to better understand and constructively embrace diverse cultures that exist both within and beyond America’s shores.
</p>
<p>
(Developed for Social Studies/Language Arts/Social Development, grades 3-4; recommended for Social Studies/Language Arts/Social Development, grades 3-6)
</p>
</main>