---
layout: "volume"
title: "Preface to 1994 Volume I"
path: "/curriculum/units/1994/1/"
unitTitle: "Preface"
unitAuthor: "-"
unitVolume: "Family Law, Family Lives: New View of Parents, Children and the State"
---
<body>
<p>
In March 1994, fifty-two teachers from the New Haven Public Schools became Fellows of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute to prepare new curricular materials for school courses. Established in 1975, the Institute is a partnership of Yale University and the New Haven Public Schools, designed to strengthen teaching and improve learning of the humanities and the sciences in our community’s schools. Through the Institute, Yale faculty members and school teachers join in a collegial relationship. The Institute is also an interschool and interdisciplinary forum for teachers to work together on new curricula. The Institute has repeatedly received national recognition as a pioneering and successful model of university-school collaboration that integrates curriculum development with intellectual renewal for teachers.
</p>
<p>
Teachers had primary responsibility for identifying the subjects the Institute would address. Between October and December 1993, Institute Representatives canvassed teachers in each New Haven elementary, middle, and high school to determine the subjects they would like the Institute to treat. The Institute then circulated descriptions of seminars that addressed teachers’ interests. In applying to the Institute, teachers described unit topics on which they proposed to work and the relationship of these topics to Institute seminars and to courses they would teach in the coming school year. Five seminars were organized, corresponding to the principal themes of the Fellows’ proposals. The seminar entitled “Family Law, Family Lives: New View of Parents, Children and the State” was led by Shelley Burtt, Assistant Professor of Political Science. Between March and August, Fellows participated in seminar meetings, researched their topics, and attended a series of lectures by Yale faculty members.
</p>
<p>
The curriculum units Fellows wrote are their own; they are presented in five volumes, one for each seminar. A list of the one-hundred-three volumes of Institute units published between 1975 and 1994 appears on the following pages. Guides to each year’s units, a topical Index of all nine-hundred-two units written between 1975 and 1994, and reference lists showing the relationship of the units to school curricula are available from the Institute. An electronic version of many of these curricular resources is accessible through Yaleinfo, the Yale Gopher server (gopher.yale.edu). The units that follow contain four elements: objectives, teaching strategies, sample lessons and classroom activities, and lists of resources for teachers and students. They are intended primarily for the use of Institute Fellows and their colleagues who teach in New Haven.
</p>
<p>
The 1994 Institute was supported by grants from The National Endowment for the Humanities and the Xerox Foundation. The materials presented here do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
</p>
<p>
James R. Vivian
</p>
<p>
New Haven
</p>
<p>
August 1994
</p>
</body>