---
layout: "volume"
title: "Introduction to 1992 Volume V"
path: "/curriculum/units/1992/5/92.05.intro.x.html"
unitTitle: "Introduction"
unitAuthor: "Gordon T. Geballe"
unitVolume: "Ecosystems: Tools for Science and Math Teachers"
---
<body>
<h3>
Introduction
</h3>
The world has entered the “Environmental Era.” Every day on television and in the newspapers, humans around the world are reminded of the need to take care of the world we live in. Environmental problems are causing us to rethink how we throw away our garbage, what clothes we wear in the sun, and what chemicals to use in and around our homes. Slowly but surely we are all changing our habits. Children seem especially excited about talking and learning about these issues.
<p>
School children are very interested in environmental current events. Often the children will be more active recyclers than their parents. Children care about animals and will write letters to government officials to save endangered species. Children enjoy flowers and help plant gardens to beautify yards. It is easy to have students think about the world they live in.
</p>
<p>
This volume provides many creative ideas that will help teachers and parents tap this love of nature so that children will develop a greater understanding of their world.
</p>
<p>
The authors of these chapters worked hard to develop “hands-on” activities. We felt that science teaching needs projects that the students can perform. We hope that you will modify and try any changes you can think of. Teachers should reward every child that suggests a new way of carrying out the activity. Teachers should hope for questions. These activities are designed to promote an interest in science.
</p>
<p>
Gordon T. Geballe
</p>
</body>