---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 91.06.01"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1991/6/91.06.01.x.html"
unitTitle: "Weather, Climate and Environmental Change"
unitAuthor: "Raymond Brooks"
keywords: "Ecology Environmental Science Global Change New Haven Connecticut"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Earth Science, grade 8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 91.06.01:
</h4>
The purpose of this unit is to allow science classes that have only a limited time to spend on topics an opportunity to hit on the high points of the subject.  It will also provide an opportunity to perform various activities for a better understanding of the unit.  Global change can then be discussed and researched by building on the various activities performed by the student.
<p>
The unit begins by introducing the student to the seven basic weather elements and the instruments that we use to measure each element.  I choose to begin with this topic as students like hands-on activities—and they can also study changes over a short period of time.
</p>
<p>
We then move to climate and discuss briefly the three major climate regions, reminding the student of the activities we performed with the angle of light and temperature.  Causes and evidence of climate changes are introduced to the student so they understand that nature has left records to study and support these ideas.  Plate tectonics is studied showing the plate boundaries and the forces that move these plates.  The results of plate movements is also investigated.  We end by discussing past, present and future climates.  The main activity for the unit is to research the climate of New Haven over the past 50 years.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Earth Science, grade 8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Ecology Environmental Science Global Change New Haven Connecticut
</i>
</p>
</body>