---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 99.03.01"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1999/3/99.03.01.x.html"
unitTitle: "Immigration in the United States"
unitAuthor: "Joyce Bryant"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for History and Math, grade 8."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 99.03.01:
</h4>
In this unit the focus is on math and social studies through team teaching.  Through math one will be able to deal with word problems, statistics, economics and population which are related to math and social studies.
<p>
Immigration is the act of coming to a foreign country to live.  Leaving one's country to settle in another is called immigration.  Immigrants flee their countries because of persecution, war, disasters, famines, and epidemics.  Some forsake their homeland seeking adventure, avoiding unbearable family situations and to reunite with loved ones.  They also seeks better jobs, better economic security and to get away from religious persecution.  Professional people emigrate because of better opportunities.
</p>
<p>
Most people find it difficult to move from their native land to a strange country, but throughout history millions have done so.  The heaviest immigration worldwide took place from the early 1800's to the Great Depression.  Most come from Europe and more than half emigrated to the United States.
</p>
<p>
The constitution of the United States begins:  We the people of the United States.  We know that the United States is not made up of a single people.  People from all continents came to America, and they forged this nation and then made it their own.  America has been called the melting pot.  It is not merely a nation, but a teeming nation of nations.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for History and Math, grade 8.)
</p>
</body>