---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 95.02.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1995/2/95.02.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Teaching Acting Technique and Building a Character through Cinema"
unitAuthor: "Carol L. Penney"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Drama/Acting, grades 11-12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 95.02.09:
</h4>
This curriculum unit will be directed toward second and third year acting students at the Cooperative Arts and Humanities High School. These students will have a strong background in improvisation, storytelling, and play and character analysis. We will emphasize acting technique and building a character based on the Stanislavsky system.
<p>
The acting style of most American actors is based on this system, which is known as American Method Acting. I plan to teach acting technique and character-building through the practical application of some of the tenets of American Method Acting.
</p>
<p>
This course will revolve around three films of Marlon Brando: “On the Waterfront,” “A Streetcar Named Desire,” and “Viva Zapata!” These three films are directed by Elia Kazan, one of the founders of the Actors’ Studio, where Brando studied the Method.
</p>
<p>
“On the Waterfront” will be studied with the final shooting script. “A Streetcar Named Desire: Acting Edition” will be our text for the film of the same name. Selected material on the life and times of Emiliano Zapata and a novelette of Viva Zapata! will be used for the third film.
</p>
<p>
By studying professional actors in films and the Stanislavsky system, the students will develop their critical and technical skills.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Drama/Acting, grades 11-12)
</p>
</body>