---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 95.02.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1995/2/95.02.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "High School Arts: Dance for Literature and Film"
unitAuthor: "Cheree R. Knight"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Dance/Arts, high school level"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 95.02.07:
</h4>
The curriculum unit that I’ve provided entails six variations of potential lesson plans for dance teachers on the high school levels. I have concentrated on dance classes/projects for high school students because the lessons require intermediate to advanced skills, both cognitively and physically. The students will need to have competent individual and group-work skills. It is possible that dance teachers of junior high school students may find some of the variations present a positive challenge for their students. Therefore, although I am focusing on the high school level, dance teachers of different grades should not be reluctant to use the unit as a suggestive guideline for lesson plan alternatives and/or additions to their existing curricula. The unit is divided into six lessons. The lessons consist of objectives (activities), teacher’s goals, and examples I myself have used and plan to incorporate into my curriculum at the Cooperative Arts &amp; Humanities High School, all of which I have developed as a result of my dance training and experience.
<p>
I have provided, at the end of the unit, an example of one of my ballet production goals for the 1995-1996 academic/arts year. I will choreograph a ballet for the story of Sula by Toni Morrison. It is my hope that the ballet will move the audience(s) to read the literature, and encourage a stronger following/support system for the New Haven Comprehensive’s dance art departments.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Dance/Arts, high school level)
</p>
</body>