---
layout: "page"
title: "...and for New Haven"
path: "/brochures/A2.html"
---
<main>
<center><h2>...and for New Haven</h2>
</center>
<hr/>
<h3>Contents:</h3>
<ul>
<a href="#a">
</a><li><a href="#a">Partnership</a>
<a href="#b"></a></li><li><a href="#b">Challenge</a>
<a href="#c"></a></li><li><a href="#c">Promise</a>
<a href="#d"></a></li><li><a href="#d">Quotations</a>
<a href="#e"></a></li><li><a href="#e">Contact Info</a>
</li></ul>
<hr/>
<a name="a">
<h3>Partnership</h3>
The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is founded on the premise that, as
an educational institution, the main resource that Yale University has to
offer its home community is its faculty.  Furthermore, within the larger
relationship between Yale and New Haven, no partnership is more mutually
beneficial than one with the local public school system.
<p>When Yale and New Haven established the Institute in 1978, their plans
were based on ten years of successful experience with a program in History
education. Thus, the Teachers Institute exemplifies a 25-year tradition of
teachers at Yale working collaboratively with their counterparts who teach
in New Haven schools. In approach, the Institute is designed to respond to
the needs and interests that New Haven teachers themselves identify. It
stresses that teachers from Yale and from New Haven are professional
colleagues with a strong common interest in the teaching of their subjects
in the humanities and the sciences.
</p><p>From the outset, teachers have played leadership roles in planning and
conducting the Institute; they have insisted that its program be
demanding, and effective in strengthening teaching and learning in New
Haven schools. The theme of the Institute is therefore to increase the
preparation of teachers and to assist them in developing new materials for
school courses.
</p></a><center><a name="a"></a><div align="right"><a name="a"></a><p><a name="a">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of ...and for New Haven</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="b">
<h3>Challenge</h3>
Yale has undertaken an initiative to raise an adequate endowment and
thereby make the Teachers Institute the first such collaborative program
to be established permanently within any university. The Endowment Fund
and the shared commitment to this activity will ensure that the Institute
always benefits New Haven and Yale, and continues to serve as a model for
programs in other communities across the country.
<p>To assist and encourage this fund raising, the DeWitt Wallace- Reader's
Digest Fund awarded a seminal, $2 million endowment challenge grant, which
must be matched dollar for dollar. In addition, the National Endowment for
the Humanities awarded a $750,000 challenge grant toward the Institute s
endowment, which requires that by July 1995 four dollars be raised to
secure each dollar of their offer. Overall, the Institute is seeking a $5
million endowment for its work in the humanities, and $2 million to
provide its work in the sciences a similar financial stability.
</p><p>Gifts for endowment or cash reserves qualify as matching for these
challenges. Opportunities exist for named gifts to be made within this
initiative. For example, the Mary B. Griswold Endowment Fund for the
Institute honors her service to Yale, New Haven, and education.
</p></a><center><a name="b"></a><div align="right"><a name="b"></a><p><a name="b">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of ...and for New Haven</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="c">
<h3>Promise</h3>
<b>Locally: </b>  Over forty percent (40%) of all current New Haven middle
and high school humanities and science teachers have participated as
Institute Fellows. More than 300 individual teachers have completed the
Institute, many of them more than once. More than 70 Yale faculty members
have led seminars and given talks in the Institute, many more than once.
Through 93 different seminars, New Haven teachers have developed 747
curriculum units, which are taught widely in school courses by Fellows and
by other teachers who have not participated directly in seminars.
<p>Studies have shown that the Institute has increased teachers'
preparation in the subjects they teach, raised their morale, and
encouraged them to remain in teaching in the local, urban school district.
Teachers report how, through the Institute, they have become more
effective with their students, and how student learning has been
enhanced.</p><p>
<b>Nationally: </b>The Institute has been recognized as a pioneering and
successful model of university-school partnership by the Rockefeller
Commission on the Humanities, the National Association of Secondary School
Principals, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, the
College Board, the Council for the Advancement and Support of Education,
the American Association for Higher Education, the U. S. Department of
Education, and the Business-Higher Education Forum, among other
organizations.
</p></a><center><a name="c"></a><div align="right"><a name="c"></a><p><a name="c">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of ...and for New Haven</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="d">
<i>The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is one of the most effective
school-university partnerships in America. This partnership has direct
impact in the classroom with school and university faculty members working
together to strengthen student learning.
</i><p align="center">
-Gordon M. Ambach
<br/><font size="-1">Executive Director, Council of Chief State School
Officers</font>
</p>
<i>This is an enormously important program that brings the resources of
the University to teachers in the schools in a way that recognizes their
own professional stature. The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is leading
the way to improve teaching and education.
</i><p align="center"> -Ernest L. Boyer
<br/><font size="-1">President, Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching</font>
</p>
<i>The Institute powerfully represents the unity of academic interest
among those who teach in the university and those who work with younger
folk. The Institute was one of the first school-university partnerships,
and its permanence gives a new target for those who follow on to reach.
</i><p align="center"> -Theodore R. Sizer
<br/><font size="-1">Chairman, Coalition of Essential Schools
</font></p>
<i> As we look to future support of collaborative programs, we believe, in
the spirit of Jim Vivian, that America s efforts at educational change
must begin in the classroom.
</i><p align="center"> -Donald M. Stewart
<br/><font size="-1">President, The College Board
</font></p>
</a><center><a name="d"></a><div align="right"><a name="d"></a><p><a name="d">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of ...and for New Haven</a></p></div></center>
<hr/>
<a name="e">
For information about opportunities to contribute to the Endowment Fund,
please contact:
<p align="Center">James R. Vivian, Director
<br/>Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
<br/>P. O. Box 3563 Yale Station
<br/>New Haven, Connecticut 06520
<br/>(203) 432-1080.</p>
</a><center><a name="e"></a><div align="right"><a name="e"></a><p><a name="e">
</a><a href="#top">to the top of ...and for New Haven</a></p></div></center>
</main>