---
layout: page
title: Awards and Recognition
path: /brochures/A9.html
---
<h2>Awards and Recognition </h2>

"Principal Recognition Accorded to the Institute by individuals and organizations since 1978"


During the 2019 Annual Conference, James Forman, Jr., Professor of Law at Yale University, sat down with **2019 National Teacher of the Year Rodney A. Robinson** to discuss his experience as a three-time National Fellow. Describing his participation in the Yale National Initiative, Robinson said, "It really made me who I am. There were three times I considered leaving education: 2011, 2014, and 2018. Each time I came up here to the seminar and I got rejuvenated, reenergized to stay in the classroom and to stay focused and to keep doing the work. But each time I saw a need within my students and coming up here allowed for me to fulfill that need. The best thing about it is that my kids are using the lessons.”

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Q_-VS1XLvdQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In 2015, Yale hosted "A Conversation with **Ted Mitchell**," the **U. S.
Under Secretary of Education**, as part of a conference on supporting
and retaining teachers in high-need public schools. The conversation was
moderated by Thomas Toch, an education policy expert and Director of the
Center on the Future of American Education at Georgetown University.
Mitchell described the Teachers Institute approach as a national model
and an example of the "re-professionalization" of teaching. He stressed
the importance of content-based development for teachers and of equity
in the distribution of effective teachers, particularly in high-poverty,
high-minority public schools.

In 2011 Thomas L. Friedman and Michael E. Mandelbaum write about the
Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute® and the Yale National Initiative® in
their book *That Used to Be Us: How America Fell Behind in the World It
Invented and How We Can Come Back* (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
2011). "Teachers' Institutes differ from most of the programs of
professional development that school districts provide and from outreach
and continuing education programs that universities typically offer in
that schoolteachers and university faculty members work together as
professional colleagues, in a program that is led in crucial respects by
the teachers themselves. This not only improves the teachers' classroom
performance; it also serves a purpose as important as recruiting and
training good teachers: keeping them."

Also in 2011 Senators Joseph Lieberman (I, CT) and Richard Blumenthal
(D, CT) and Representatives Rosa DeLauro (D, CT-3) and Chaka Fattah (D,
PA-2) have introduced legislation ([S.
1240](/pdfs/gov/S1240.pdf) and [H.R.
2255](/pdfs/gov/HR2255.pdf)) to create a
competitive grants program to establish Teachers Institutes in states
throughout the nation. The Senators' and Representatives' plan was
modeled after the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute® and recognized the
national significance of the Teachers Institute approach. The
legislation would increase teacher effectiveness and retention in
high-need school districts around the country by providing colleges and
universities and school districts the resources necessary to establish
Teachers Institutes in most states.

In its 2010 Report to the President *Prepare and Inspire: K-12 Education
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) for America's
Future*, the **President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology** wrote: "A variety of programs attempt to bridge the gaps
between public schools and the STEM professional community, but not all
such programs provide teachers and schools with resources that are
useful in their classrooms. Nonetheless, several programs demonstrate
the potential for such connections to benefit K-12 schools. For example,
Teachers Institutes, which began in 1978 in New Haven and have since
expanded to cities across the country, pair universities and school
districts, allowing teachers to identify the topics on which they would
like to collaborate. University professors then guide these teachers
through inquiry-based learning in a STEM subject area\.... It is
important that we find ways to harness these sources of partnership and
expertise in a committed, sustained way relevant to K-12 teachers and
students."

In 2009, **Rogers M. Smith** authored a report on *Evaluation of
Teachers Institute Experiences*. He concluded: "Teachers Institutes
significantly strengthen teachers in all five of the major dimensions of
teacher quality. They also include all seven elements now recognized to
be crucial in successful professional development programs. The study
also shows that Institute participants had nearly twice the retention
rate of non-participants in local teaching. Because research suggests
that experience within a district is more strongly associated with
teaching effectiveness than earlier experiences elsewhere, this finding
is especially notable."

Commenting on that report, **New Haven Public Schools Superintendent
Reginald R. Mayo** said: "The Institute has made an enormous
contribution to strengthening teaching and learning in the New Haven
Public Schools. It has been a significant factor in school improvement
by exciting teachers and sparking student interest in learning. I have
seen how powerful Institute participation can be for creating a very
fruitful collaboration among teachers within a school, and in
stimulating them to learn more about the subjects they teach and to
develop new classroom materials that excite and engage students in
learning. Maintaining this kind of teacher quality in our schools has
never been more important, so the Report's finding about the retention
of Institute participants is especially encouraging."

In 2007, Connecticut Senators **Joseph Lieberman** and **Christopher
Dodd** and Congresswoman **Rosa DeLauro** of New Haven introduced
similar legislation (S. 2212 and H.R. 3209), which was cosponsored in
the House by **Joe Courtney**, **John Larson**, and **Joe Sestak**.

In 2004, **Rogers M. Smith, Christopher H. Browne Distinguished
Professor of Political Science at the University of Pennsylvania**
authored a report on evaluation of the Yale New Haven Teachers
Institute's National Demonstration Project. Smith concluded: "It is
clear that successful Teachers Institutes are not easily achieved. They
require, especially, skilled directors committed to the Institute
approach; support from top administrative officials on both sides of the
partnerships between institutions of higher education and public school
districts; the creation of effective mechanisms for broad teacher
participation and strong teacher leadership; and solid, usually diverse
funding sources. These are demanding requirements. But the National
Demonstration Project has shown clearly that they can be met, and that
everywhere they are met, the quality of teaching in America's schools
can be significantly improved."

In 2004, Connecticut Senators **Joseph Lieberman** and **Christopher
Dodd** introduced a bill (S. 990) to create a grants program to
establish Teachers Institutes in states throughout the nation. The
Senators' plan was modeled after the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
Congresswoman **Rosa DeLauro** of New Haven introduced a companion
measure (H.R. 2663) in the House of Representatives. House cosponsors
included **Chaka Fattah**, **Rush D. Holt**, **Nancy L. Johnson**,
**John B. Larson**, **Christopher Shays**, and **Rob Simmons**.

In 2002 in the *Congressional Record* **U.S. Congresswoman Rosa
DeLauro** said, "New Haven has certainly benefited from this tremendous
organization which has not only touched the lives of so many teachers,
but countless numbers of our children. The Institute has earned a
distinguished reputation and has been recognized at every level of
government as a model for all communities."

That year **Jonathan F. Fanton**, **President of the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation**, said, "Having worked in urban
universities for more than thirty years, including in New York and
Chicago, I have seen many attempts at partnership between institutions
of higher education and their local public schools. The Yale-New Haven
Teachers Institute is a remarkably effective, enduring example of such
collaboration\... Drawing upon the distinctive strengths and common
interests of a university and an urban school district, the Teachers
Institute is an instrument of great promise for other cities across the
country. The ultimate aim is to support teaching and learning for
students. But the collateral benefits, both for a university and for the
city it calls home, are broader. As a face-to-face, intensive, sustained
collective undertaking, the Institute is a model that can be adapted and
implemented widely."

In 2001 in a feature article for a special issue of *On Common Ground*®,
**U.S. Secretary of Education Rod Paige** commented: "I applaud the
Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute for supplying models for what
universities should do. Its projects are not just inspiring, they are
creating an environment in which partnerships will be the norm, not the
exception. Every great university should be linked to its surrounding
schools by a thriving and many-tiered partnership. Observers should not
ask why a few universities have partnerships, but why the rest do not."

In 1998, **Gerald N. Tirozzi, U.S. Assistant Secretary for Elementary
and Secondary Education**, said: "The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
has been a beacon of hope for what is possible when a significant
partner and an enlightened school district commit to working closely and
cooperatively together to enhance teaching and to improve the
teaching-learning process."

In 1997 in *Creative America*, its Report to the **President, the
President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities** recommended
partnerships to "provide professional development for teachers; improve
instruction in the arts and the humanities by encouraging colleges,
universities and cultural organizations to cooperate with local school
systems; and provide incentives to college and university faculty to
develop collaborations with school teachers, educational administrators,
and artists." The Committee cited the Institute as an "exemplary"
partnership of this type: "Teachers in the arts and the humanities need
the time and resources to participate in professional development to
enrich their own knowledge and to gain practical ideas for their
classrooms. At the community level, innovative partnerships have formed
among some universities, cultural institutions, and school districts.
Yale University and the public schools of New Haven, Connecticut have
worked in partnership since 1978 to strengthen teaching in the city's
schools. The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute brings college faculty
and school teachers together on an equal footing to develop new course
material in the humanities and the sciences, and to discuss issues
chosen by the teachers themselves."

In 1995, **Sheldon Hackney**, **Chairman of the National Endowment for
the Humanities**, said: "The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is the
first and foremost of its kind, serving as a model of how a university
and a city school system can work together to improve the teaching in
urban schools. The NEH is proud to have been part of this effort since
the beginning."

In 1992, the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute was honored as one of the
nation' s leading school-reform alliances by the **Business-Higher
Education Forum**, a Washington-based organization of corporate and
academic chief executives sponsored by the American Council on Education
(ACE). ACE President Robert H. Atwell stated that projects like the
Institute "illustrate the best hope of the education reform movement in
the United States. By bringing together all major sectors of the
community and focusing their efforts on disadvantaged minority students,
it shows that dramatic educational improvements are possible. Equally
important, it emphasizes the continuity of the educational system, from
elementary through higher education, demonstrating to disadvantaged
students that the doors to educational and economic opportunity remain
open."

In a speech at the AAHE-sponsored National Conference on School-College
Collaboration in 1990, **Donald M. Stewart, President of the College
Board**, said: "As we look to future support of collaborative programs,
we believe, in the spirit of \[Institute Director\] Jim Vivian, that
America's efforts at educational change must begin in the classroom.
Educational reform means enlarging the capacity of more young people to
learn and achieve. A key to this goal lies in the quality of the
relationships of teachers and students in schools. This relationship, in
turn, is very dependent on the teachers' effectiveness as a teacher, on
the quality of instruction, on the knowledge and skills he or she brings
to the classroom."

Commenting on the Institute's initiative to establish an endowment,
**Ernest L. Boyer** said: "This is an enormously important program that
brings the resources of the University to teachers in the schools in a
way that recognizes their own professional stature. The Yale-New Haven
Teachers Institute is leading the way to improve teaching and
education."

Also on the occasion of the announcement of the Institute's endowment
initiative, **Gordon M. Ambach**, the Executive Director of the Council
of Chief State School Officers, said: "The Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute is one of the most effective school-university partnerships in
America. This partnership has direct impact in the classroom with school
and university faculty members working together to strengthen student
learning. I am delighted the Institute has support to be a permanent
part of the University."

**Theodore R. Sizer, Chairman of the Coalition of Essential Schools and
of the Education Department at Brown University**, said: "The permanent
endowment of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute is a notable
achievement for Yale and for the City of New Haven. The Institute not
only signals the University's commitment to its immediate community, but
also powerfully represents the unity of academic interest among those
who teach in the University and those who work with younger folk. The
Institute was one of the first school-university partnerships, and its
permanence gives a new target for those who follow on to reach."

In 1989 in testimony before U.S. Senate and House committees **Ernest L.
Boyer**, **President of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching**, recommended the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute as a model
for institutes to be established across the country.

In 1988 in their report, *An Imperiled Generation*: *Saving Urban
Schools*, the Board of Trustees of the **Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching** recommended that "colleges should have summer
and year-long institutes, following the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute model which asks the teachers themselves to shape the content
of the program."

In 1985 the **U.S. Department of Education** cited the Teachers
Institute as "exemplary" and "among the most substantial and effective"
university-school partnerships in the nation.

The Teachers Institute was invited to present its program at the 1985
**National Symposium on Private Sector Initiatives**, sponsored by the
White House.

In the same year, the Institute Director presented testimony before the
**Senate Subcommittee on Education, Arts, and Humanities**. The
Committee was considering legislation that would authorize a major
national program of teachers institutes in the humanities in all the
states. The sponsors of the legislation singled out the Yale-New Haven
Teachers Institute as a most successful example of precisely the kind of
program they envisioned the legislation would establish in many
communities across the country.

In 1984 the **American Association for Higher Education** (AAHE),
**Council of Chief State School Officers**, **National Association of
Secondary School Principals**, and the **Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching** singled out the Institute as a "pioneering and
nationally significant program with an exemplary approach for improving
public education."

The Teachers Institute received the 1984 Grand Award from the **Council
for the Advancement and Support of Education** as one of the best
collaborative programs in the nation.

In 1982 the **National Endowment for the Humanities** awarded the
Teachers Institute a grant for the dissemination of its model
nationally, and revised NEH guidelines to encourage other communities to
develop similar programs.

*In School and College: Partnerships in Education*, a Special Report the
**Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching** released at a
Yale conference in 1983, **Gene I. Maeroff** wrote: "Historically, the
preparation of teachers has been dominated by higher education. The
schools have little to say about it and are rarely consulted. The result
is endless finger-pointing about the quality of teaching in the
schools." Maeroff described the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute as one
of the rare examples of cooperative school-college partnerships designed
to provide "continuing education" to teachers, and in a foreword to the
Report, Carnegie Foundation President **Ernest L. Boyer** wrote, "Every
college and university should establish a partnership with one or more
school districts to provide educational and cultural enrichment as
determined by principals and teachers at the schools."

In 1980 the **Rockefeller Commission on the Humanities** cited the
Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute as a promising model of
university-school collaboration that "integrates curriculum development
with intellectual renewal for teachers."

