---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 92.02.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1992/2/92.02.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Adventure In The Caribbean: Effects Of The Discovery of Haiti, Martinique, and Guadeloupe"
unitAuthor: "Iole A. Apicella"
keywords: "Guadeloupe History Haiti Martiniqe Social South America"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for French, grades 7-10"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 92.02.04:
</h4>
This unit has been designed to give more information on the islands of Haiti, Martinique, and Guadeloupe. This unit has been devised for the seventh and eighth grade students but because of the subject itself it can be expanded to higher levels.
<p>
The idea of this unit was born from the need to know more about the French Caribbean Islands which is a subject I must teach during the course of the year. Because of the very little information offered on these islands, I was ready and grateful when this seminar came about.
</p>
<p>
This unit includes, therefore, information on the Spanish discovery of these islands and the subsequent take over, piracy, French infiltration and conquest, introduction to slavery, English domination, French repossession, slavery, fights for freedom, famous freedom fighters and important persons who affected the life of these islands. This unit includes a letter from Christopher Columbus describing his first encounter with the natives, and partial information on the “Code Noir” (Black Code) issued by King Louis XIV to attenuate the danger of revolts by the slaves on the islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe. It also includes information about the restrictions that took place after the freedom from slavery was brutally revoked. I believe that this unit will be very beneficial especially in dealing with subjects such as expansionism, slavery, freedom, and thirst for power and corruption. I hope that this unit will be as beneficial to other teachers as it was for me.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for French, grades 7-10)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Guadeloupe History Haiti Martiniqe Social South America
</i>
</p>
</body>