---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/elementary/Mathematics.html"
---
<main>  <center><a name="top"></a><b><h3>Mathematics</h3></b></center> <hr/> <b><a href="index.html">Teaching in the Elementary School Classroom Contents</a> | <a href="..\">Reference Lists</a></b> <br/> <hr width="100%"/> <p><a name="a"></a><b>Problem Solving</b> </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1980/7/80.07.01.x.html">80.07.01</a>	Incorporating Problem Solving into Basic Skills Development</b> <br/>This unit offers practical approaches to teaching students to solve word problems. Develops steps in attacking problems. Includes problems to illustrate points. This unit is suitable for grades 4-5. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1980/7/80.07.02.x.html">80.07.02</a>	Problem Solving through Careers with Hands on Material</b> <br/>Focuses on six careers to develop problem-solving skills. Pupils learn about careers as well as math. Suggests trips and speakers. Includes problem examples for each career. Interdisciplinary approach. This unit is suitable for grades 4-5. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1980/7/80.07.10.x.html">80.07.10</a>	Math is Everywhere: A Problem Solving Teaching Unit</b> <br/>Discusses a variety of strategies that may be used in attacking and solving a math problem. Includes examples of how they may be used. Adaptable for grades 4-5 </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1982/6/82.06.11.x.html">82.06.11</a>	Consumer Practices in Low-Income Families with Strategies for Improved Financial Management</b> <br/>Although the social implications of low income families is the main thrust of this unit, its mathematical aspects of budgeting can be used by the middle-grades. Budgeting practices for home and business are covered in this unit. Resource information on consumer practices and simple computation skills can be adapted for grades 2-5. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1982/6/82.06.13.x.html">82.06.13</a>	Family Finances</b> <br/>Teachers in grades 2 through 5 can utilize the general mathematical concepts supplied through this unit. Consumer applications are the focus of this unit. This unit can be used as a resource for the classroom or school store. There are good techniques and applications provided in the lesson plans. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1984/2/84.02.05.x.html">84.02.05</a>	The Early Greek Contribution to Geometry</b> <br/>The objectives of this unit are to expose students to the beginnings of geometry and one man who is credited with a large part of its early development is Pythagoras. This unit is a great introduction to the basic principles of geometry. Adaptable for upper elementary students, grades 4-5. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1985/8/85.08.02.x.html">85.08.02</a>	An Introduction to Elementary Statistics</b> <br/>This unit contains general information for collecting, understanding and computing statistics. The basic skills needed are outlined. The lessons are adaptable to grades 2-5 and can be used in conjunction with graphing and charting skills required by the Connecticut Mastery Test. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1985/8/85.08.04.x.html">85.08.04</a>	The Statistics Sampler</b> <br/>Stressing the skills needed for computing statistics, this unit also includes information on the gathering of data, the interpretation of statistics and the use of statistics. This unit is a good resource for data collection and interpretation in the elementary classroom. Recommended for grades 2 through 5 as a resource. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1987/5/87.05.02.x.html">87.05.02</a>	An Introduction to Mathematical Probability</b> <br/>Although designed for Algebra III classes, parts of this unit could be extracted and taught within the framework of the upper elementary math curriculum, 4-5. The unit provides problem-solving activities to improve the students’ understanding in probability theory. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1987/6/87.06.01.x.html">87.06.01</a>	Bicycles</b> <br/>This is an exciting unit using bicycles for learning math skills. Hands-on experiments are offered using a bicycle for learning about gears and measuring distance. It is easily adaptable for upper elementary students. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1988/6/88.06.09.x.html">88.06.09</a>	Weather Awareness</b> <br/>Concentrating on consumer applications in mathematics, this unit focuses on how they are used in respect to the weather. Weather topics and consumer issues are paralleled. Teachers using weather as a classroom theme may choose to use the sample lessons and background information to integrate the subject into mathematics activities. Grades K through 5 can use this unit. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1989/6/89.06.02.x.html">89.06.02</a>	Making Measurement Simple: The Metric System</b> <br/>This unit discusses what metrics are, and how and why it came about. Lessons contain hands-on activities that could easily be adapted for middle and upper elementary students, grades 3-5. </p><p><b><a href="../../guides/1999/5/99.05.05.x.html">99.05.05</a>	Introduction to Chemistry</b> <br/>This unit is a multisensory thematic unit, which will introduce basic concepts in Chemistry to students with moderate mental retardation between the ages of nine and thirteen. While this unit is intended for students with special needs, regular education teachers at the primary level may find this information appropriate for their classes. The unit incorporates math, reading, science, and lab work. The unit addresses varies learning styles by utilizing graphing, KWL’s and hands on lessons and experiments. The unit also utilizes journal writing and portfolios to chart progress and mastery of objectives. Also, a section on vocabulary and language is included to address the need for a common vocabulary in Chemistry. </p><div align="right"><a href="#a">to the top of Problem Solving</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of the Mathematics</a></div><hr/> © 2002 by the <a href="/">Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</a><table cellpadding="2">                 
</table></main>