---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1978/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1978/1/78.01.09.x.html">78.01.09</a> <br/> Through the use of poetry, plays, and stories written in Spanish, this unit seeks to teach various aspects of Puerto Rican history and culture. This unit requires Spanish proficiency. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.01.x.html">78.02.01</a> <br/> Through the use of poetry and prose written by Paul Lawrence Dunbar, James Weldon Johnson, Langston Hughes, and Maya Angelou, this unit encourages an appreciation for literature in young readers. The use of dialect is prevalent in most selections. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.02.x.html">78.02.02</a> <br/> This unit presents philosophical differences between two prominent African American leaders, Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Dubois who criticized Washington, a discussion of the "talented tenth," and the rising influence of civil rights organizations. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.03.x.html">78.02.03</a> <br/> This unit places the Harlem Renaissance in historical perspective. There is emphasis on the development of the "Black Mecca," the Great Migration, and the influence of Marcus Garvey. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.04.x.html">78.02.04</a> <br/> This unit uses short stories written by 19th century writers, to show the legacy of blacks and whites resulting from the slave holder/enslaved relationship that existed in this country. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.05.x.html">78.02.05</a> <br/> This unit presents the Great Migration and its cultural, economic, and social impact on Northern Blacks and Whites. Contains lessons that include geography, history, political science, and economics. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.06.x.html">78.02.06</a> <br/> This unit provides a general historical and social overview of the arrival and experiences of African American and Italian residents of New Haven. The unit highlights the Great Depression, while comparing and contrasting the two aforementioned groups. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.07.x.html">78.02.07</a> <br/> This unit presents a comparative study of works by African American and European American writers. Lesson plans include elements of a short story such as local color, character, point of view, and theme. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.08.x.html">78.02.08</a> <br/> This unit uses filmstrips, poetry, and prose to introduce the Harlem Renaissance. Lessons investigate the West Indian influence, as well as the attitudes and philosophy of Renaissance writers. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/2/78.02.09.x.html">78.02.09</a> <br/> This unit explains, compares, and contrasts two historical cases: The Amistad Affair and The Black Panther Trials. Resources for teachers are limited. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/3/78.03.02.x.html">78.03.02</a> <br/> Through the use of audio-visual and written materials, this unit explores racial, religious, and gender prejudice. A very detailed course outline is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/3/78.03.08.x.html">78.03.08</a> <br/> With an emphasis on Black folklore, this unit uses visual art, film, music, and folktales to familiarize students with the creation and development of the Delta blues. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/3/78.03.09.x.html">78.03.09</a> <br/> This unit explores the status, self-image, and roles of women in literature written by women. The unit encourages the use of journals, character development in plays, and anthologies. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/3/78.03.10.x.html">78.03.10</a> <br/> Through the exploration of 17th through 20th century writings, this unit presents the female experiences in America. The unit lessons include the use of movies, slides, magazines, diaries, visual and performing arts. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1978/3/78.03.11.x.html">78.03.11</a> <br/> This unit presents the struggle of women writers to become recognized and accepted as valuable members of the literary community. All materials presented are
</p></main>