---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 00.05.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2000/5/00.05.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Acoustics House"
unitAuthor: "Eddie B. Rose"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Algebra and Geometry, grades 6-12."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 00.05.08:
</h4>
"The Acoustics House" curriculum is a modularized, individualized problem-solving scientific/mathematics activity for students in high school math.  Contents of the packets focus on architecture sound and its relationship to science and mathematics.  The curriculum is designed to integrate reading, writing, collaboration, science and mathematics.  The  intended outcome is to enable students to demonstrate and interpret steps used to attain solutions for real life problems.
<p>
Students will gain expedience in using the scientific method, solving problems to the best of their ability, and analyzing old and new information.  They will receive a variety of guided explanations and demonstrations on problem-solving, along with reviewing basic language skills and learning to monitor their own progress.
</p>
<p>
Students will also work in cooperative groups as cooperative groups play an important role in school and outside of school.  Students will interact and work in small groups throughout each of the activities.  Team building and cooperation are important skills' students will need to meet the challenges of our changing world.  For some students, working with others will be a new experience.  The expected outcome is to develop the skills involved in collaboration and respect for the ideas of others.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Algebra and Geometry, grades 6-12.)
</p>
</body>