---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 00.05.11"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2000/5/00.05.11.x.html"
unitTitle: "Basic Reading of Sound Words-Onomatopoeia"
unitAuthor: "Pamela J. Tonge"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Reading and Language Arts, grades K-6."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 00.05.11:
</h4>
The following unit will explore the "uniqueness" and "creativeness" of sound.  Sound is a very powerful element.  Sound is a form of energy that makes it possible to hear speech, noise and music.  Sound waves are heard by the ears and understood by the brain as noise, music or speech.
<p>
This curriculum unit will involve students to listen attentively to the sounds in and around their environment.  Communication of sounds has been around for thousands of years.  In this unit, students will engage in various and creative assignments/projects of reading and writing of sound words and realize how they form a way of understanding for us to relate to.
</p>
<p>
In this curriculum unit, a variety of lessons will be presented with objectives and strategies.  These lessons are only suggested; it is indeed possible to alter these activities as they pertain to the students you teach.  Duration and times for each class, grade or students level, etc. will vary, just as long as you are able to master the objective that is intended.  Adding your own touch to any lesson is an added benefit.
</p>
<p>
Onomatopoeia is a form of communication that displays, in written form, the combination of speaking, reading, hearing and writing a language all its own.  Onomatopoeia is used to describe a sound made by an object.  It's an imitation of the sound that the object makes or has an association.
</p>
<p>
Students will have the opportunity to tap into their own imagination and express themselves through reading and writing of this curriculum unit of communication.  The students will come in contact to familiar and unfamiliar sound words that will assist them in creating personal and beautifully written masterpieces that they can write and read.
</p>
<p>
This curriculum unit can be used for many subjects or various topics and themes, just a few are highlighted here.
</p>
<p>
This curriculum unit is intended for elementary grades through middle school.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Reading and Language Arts, grades K-6.)
</p>
</body>