---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 94.01.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1994/1/94.01.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Teaching Juveniles How to Plan for the Future"
unitAuthor: "Pamela Monk Kelley"
keywords: "Juvenile Delinquency Concept Theory Self-esteem Building Adolescence Empowerment Slavery Afro-American"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies and Math, grades 4-11"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 94.01.04:
</h4>
“Never Alone” is a typical diversion curriculum, designed to provide resources for young offenders who are incarcerated at the Juvenile Detention Center. The plan book is divided into five different interdisciplinary units; 1) Introduction on freedom, 2) Who am I? 3) Why am I here? 4) Where am I going?, and 5) How do I get there? This flexible curriculum is designed for “reluctant learners,” a very unique population of students. The reluctant learner is described as a delinquent offender, who is apprehended for persistent brushes with the law, and/or behaviors that are excessively violent and destructive. Also, he exhibits poor social and adaptive skills, erratic attendance, different abilities and grade levels, and is temporarily placed for a short or long indeterminate period. The teacher is unaware of whether the student is a status or severe offender. Juveniles’ charges are confidential and not accessible to the classroom teacher. Therefore, classes are grouped heterogeneously; indeed, the common bond is incarceration and institutionalization.
<p>
Due to the uncertainty of the daily routine of my classes, the most effective classroom management activities are those that are individualized and can be completed on a daily basis. The suggested plan book serves as a structured tool for a revolving population, which organizes the search for personal identity, and acquires that knowledge of the “total self.” By using the plan book system, the following skills are developed; math, language arts, vocabulary, functional living, decision-making, responsibility, organizational, and appropriate behaviors. As the student begins to work on the plan book, he/she will log/record critical incidents to assess and reflect his/her own personal growth. Strategies for the unit include: hands-on experiences, visual/auditory stimuli, role-playing, current events, cooperative learning, social network, role development, activities, individualized plan book, recreation and education.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Social Studies and Math, grades 4-11)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Juvenile Delinquency Concept Theory Self-esteem Building Adolescence Empowerment Slavery Afro-American
</i>
</p>
</body>