---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 81.06.05"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1981/6/81.06.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Basics of Basic"
unitAuthor: "Kathleen M. Huhner"
keywords: "Basic Computers Programming"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 9th through 12th grade Computer Programming at the Introductory Level."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 81.06.05:
</h4>
The primary objective of the BASIC course is to introduce high school students to computer programming as an important tool.  The students begin to write their own programs as soon as possible.  Algebraic exercises and examples are utilized since mathematics is a subject which is essential to computer applications.  The course is not directed to one specific audience, such as honor students, but is intended to be useful to students at all levels.  Most of the material included in the BASIC course will be understood readily by students at the ninth grade level, but enough advanced problems are included to make it appropriate for those who have progressed further in their studies.  The course deals mainly with the Radio-Shack TRS-80 Level II and Level III computers.  The student has “hands on” experience and an understanding of the method of operation of computers.  His programming progresses at a steady rate.  The topics covered in this unit range from the history of computers through the DIM statement in BASIC.  Problems range from computing the perimeter of one triangle to manipulating the Fibonacci sequence.
<p>
(Recommended for 9th through 12th grade Computer Programming at the Introductory Level.)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Basic Computers Programming
</i>
</p>
</body>