---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 80.07.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1980/7/80.07.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Solving Problems “by the Hundreds”: A Study of Percentage and Its Applications in the Solution of Consumer Related Problems"
unitAuthor: "Lauretta J. Fox"
keywords: "Percentage Problems Mathematics Basic Skills General Consumer Applications"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 7th and 8th grade Mathematics, 9th grade Applied Mathematics 1, 10th grade Consumer Mathematics, and Adult Basic Education Mathematics."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 80.07.07:
</h4>
The unit begins by defining the word percent and explaining the meaning of the percent symbol.  It then proceeds to show the relationship between percentages and their equivalent fractions and decimals.  A method for converting one form to the others is explained.  Four general types of percentage problems are discussed. They are: 1) finding a percent of a given number, 2) finding what percent one number is of another, 3) finding a number when a percent of it is given, 4) finding what percent greater or smaller one number is than another.  Following the explanation of the basic arithmetic skills involved in percentage problems, the unit proceeds to apply the skills to consumer-related problems.  The types of problems included are sales tax and gratuities, discount, commission, simple interest and compound interest.  A clear and concise explanation of each topic is given.  Sample problems with detailed solutions are illustrated. Following each section a set of problems is included to be solved by the students.
<p>
(Recommended for 7th and 8th grade Mathematics, 9th grade Applied Mathematics 1, 10th grade Consumer Mathematics, and Adult Basic Education Mathematics.)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Percentage Problems Mathematics Basic Skills General Consumer Applications
</i>
</p>
</body>