---
layout: "unit"
title: "80.01.02: A Guide to Teaching the Latin-American Novel to Adolescents"
path: "/curriculum/units/1980/1/80.01.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "A Guide to Teaching the Latin-American Novel to Adolescents"
unitAuthor: "Laura Ferrante-Fernandes"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 80.01.02:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Narrative
</li>
<li>
Notes
</li>
<li>
Appendix I: Sample Vocabulary List (Chapter VI)
</li>
<li>
Appendix II: Skit
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/1980/1/80.01.02.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<h3>
I.
<i>
Objectives
</i>
</h3>
Latin-American literature has been overlooked in the schools by English-speaking readers much too often, even though it has much to offer. In fact, there is an amazing lack of interest in anything that is Latin-American. It is ironic, but most Americans do not know that Puerto Ricans are American citizens. When they visit Puerto Rico, they believe that they are visiting a foreign country. The influx of Puerto Ricans and other Latin-Americans into the United States mainland has made us more aware of their language. For this reason, one finds that there are many more students enrolled in Spanish courses. Many students want to learn Spanish because they want to understand and communicate with their friends.
<p>
The high school Spanish curriculum has been geared towards Spain and its literature. It is now time to include in our curriculum Latin-America and its literature. Not only should we include them because of the obvious reason that there are more Latin-Americans than there are Spaniards, but also because there is more innovation and style coming out of Latin-America presently.
</p>
<p>
Latin-American literature encompasses all the literary works from Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Antilles. This unit will attempt to serve as a guide for teachers introducing students to Latin-American literary works. It should be taught to third or fourth year students who are highly motivated or to native Spanish speakers. The teacher needs at least six to eight weeks to teach this unit.
</p>
<p>
As a point of departure,
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
, a novel by Rómulo Gallegos, a Venezuelan, has been selected. I want to stress that any novel can be utilized. In fact, in my bibliography, you will find other works that would be of interest to the learner, such as
<i>
Mar’a Don Segundo Sombra Amalia
</i>
etc. Any of these works can be taught by the techniques and covering areas that are listed in the outline below:
</p>
<p>
A.
<i>
Venezuela
</i>
:
<i>
Geography
</i>
,
<i>
Climate
</i>
,
<i>
Resources
</i>
</p>
<p>
B.
<i>
History
</i>
</p>
<p>
C.
<i>
Language
</i>
—
<i>
Vocabulary
</i>
</p>
<p>
D.
<i>
Culture
</i>
</p>
<p>
E.
<i>
Development and Summary of Plot
</i>
</p>
<p>
F.
<i>
Skit
</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
is a novel that today’s youth can identify with. The novel takes place in the 1920’s, but the problems are modern ones: growing pains, rape, illegitimate children, crime, love, passion, revenge, class struggles, witchcraft, murder, etc. It is a novel with an enticing plot which will be most appealing to the adolescent. It has all the ingredients of an excellent soap opera.
</p>
<h3>
II.
<i>
Strategies
</i>
</h3>
Before assigning the novel, the instructor should either review or introduce the geography of Venezuela and its relationship to other countries geographically. The student should become familiar with the map of Venezuela and the rest of the continent. They should learn such information as the capital city, rivers, mountains, bordering neighbors, national resources and products, and other terrestrial characteristics and details.
<p>
A.
<i>
Venezuela: Geography, Climate, and Resources
</i>
</p>
<p>
I have included below some of the information that can be useful to the instructor. Please remember that the information has been included to facilitate the task for the teacher. The teacher should incorporate all this and expand on it. Research projects should be assigned and they should include map making, art, mobiles, posters, etc. to make the learning process richer and more interesting.
</p>
<p>
Venezuela, the capital of which is Caracas, is larger than California, Oregon, and the state of Washington combined. Colombia is located to its west, with Guyana as its southeastern neighbor. Brazil is to Venezuela’s south, and to the north, we find the Caribbean Sea. The northeastern tip of the country touches the Atlantic Ocean. This ideal location makes Venezuela one of the most progressive countries in South America. Its oil production makes it one of the wealthier countries in the continent. The climate is tropical, another advantage.
</p>
<p>
The mountain chain known as the Andes begins in Venezuela. Some of the indigenous animals found here include: the alpaca, the guanaco, the llama, and the vicüna. The longest river of Spanish America goes through Venezuela; it is called the Orinoco River. Other minor rivers are: the Capanaporo, the Cunaviche, the Arauca, and the Cinaruco.
</p>
<p>
Venezuela produces the cocoa bean which is used in making chocolate. Other products that South America has introduced the world to consist of vanilla beans, pineapples, peanuts, pecans, cashew nuts, potatoes, corn, and tomatoes.
</p>
<p>
B.
<i>
History
</i>
</p>
<p>
Students should be encouraged to do research projects of the history of the period and perhaps even contrast and compare the times in the United States during the same period.
</p>
<p>
It is important to mention in class that Venezuela was one of the first countries of South America to achieve independence from colonial Spain. It is the birthplace of Simon Bolivar,
<i>
el liberador
</i>
, otherwise known as the “George Washington” of South America.
</p>
<p>
Historical information and background about the author is also very valuable. Rómulo Gallegos was born in 1884. He was a teacher, a minister of education, a journalist, and the elected President of Venezuela. He lived during the cruel dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gómez. He left the country in self-exile, but, upon returning, was elected President. Gallegos was unable to maintain order because he had a platform full of rigorous social reforms. Within ten months, there was a military coup and Gallegos was deposed. He again went into exile, living in Mexico and the United States until the end of the Perez-Jiménez regime in 1958.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
was written in 1929. With this novel, we begin to see a breaking away from European ties which included literary and political influences.
</p>
<p>
C.
<i>
Language—Vocabulary
</i>
</p>
<p>
Vocabulary is the foundation of language learning. This book is especially difficult because it is very regional and rustic. One has to keep in mind that vocabulary differs immensely from area to area. Not only is Venezuelan Spanish different from that of other Spanish-speaking countries, it also varies from coast land to hinterland to mountains because of the space between them. This is a phenomenon which occurs in all of South America, as well as in the rest of the world.
</p>
<p>
It is also important to note that the first settlers of Venezuela were sailors from the southern coast of Spain. The people on the coast still tend to maintain the same speech patterns of their forefathers, while the people of the plains tend to use more provincial terms combining Spanish, Indian and African words. For example, many words begin with
<i>
gua
</i>
in Venezuela. The interjection
<i>
gua
</i>
is used quite frequently. Another example showing the difference from country to country is
<i>
llano
</i>
. A
<i>
llano
</i>
is a plain. Thus, a cowboy is a llanero. In Argentina, a cowboy is a
<i>
gaucho
</i>
. And in most of the countries, he is known as a
<i>
vaquero
</i>
.
</p>
<p>
Impress upon the students that language is a tool that belongs to the people. Thus, it is shaped and molded by us. One good example to demonstrate this point is one that I always use in class myself: the root of all the Romance languages is Latin. Show how the word bread evolves from the Latin
<i>
Pánis
</i>
in four different languages. In Italian the word is
<i>
pane
</i>
; in French they say
<i>
pain
</i>
; the Portuguese say p‹o; and the Spaniards say
<i>
pan.
</i>
</p>
<p>
Also suggest that they should respect all the different ways of speaking because it adds character, color, and excitement to our world.
</p>
<p>
Since
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
is difficult reading, I suggest that the teacher make a vocabulary list like I have done for chapter VI,
<i>
El recuerdo de Asdrúbal
</i>
. See Appendix I.
</p>
<p>
Another suggestion would be to ask the students to read the chapter and to assign each paragraph to different students for making another vocabulary list on their own. At the termination of this assignment, the students should re-read the passage in order to have it make sense. The teacher should also test vocabulary as frequently as possible either orally or written.
</p>
<p>
D. Culture
</p>
<p>
Students should be encouraged to find recipes for typical Venezuelan dishes such as
<i>
arepa
</i>
and
<i>
hayacas
</i>
(foods prepared with corn) and to attempt to make these and others for their classmates.
</p>
<p>
In order to set the mood for the novel, a recording of
<i>
Malagüena
</i>
would be most appropriate. Students should also be familiarized with the typical musical instruments of South America such as the
<i>
guitarra
</i>
,
<i>
quena
</i>
,
<i>
marimba
</i>
,
<i>
maracas
</i>
,
<i>
claves
</i>
,
<i>
güiro
</i>
, etc.
</p>
<p>
Other facets of Venezuelen life should be looked into and researched by the students. This can include learning and performing the dances and obtaining information about the different races, the arts, entertainment and recreation, greetings, gestures,
<i>
individualismo
</i>
,
<i>
spiritualismo
</i>
,
<i>
machismo
</i>
,
<i>
fatalismo
</i>
, the family, and much more. Facts about Venezuelan writers, musicians, actors, and painters can also be very useful. One outstanding painter of Venezuela is Tito Salas, a twentieth century painter whose major preoccupation is the fight for independence. An excellent book that deals with this movement which is sometimes called
<i>
el Arielismo
</i>
, is
<i>
The Modern Culture of Latin America
</i>
(this book is listed in the bibliography).
</p>
<p>
E.
<i>
Plot Development and Summary
</i>
</p>
<p>
The passionate description of the events and characters are related to the description of the landscape which includes the extraordinary plains,
<i>
altiplanos
</i>
, and the jungles of the brave new world. At times the characters and the land are one and the same. Do–a Bárbara is the savanna or the plain. She is beautiful and terrible at the same time. In her exist life and death. “La llanura es bella y terrible a la vez; en ella caben holgadamente, hermosa vida y muerte atroz.”
<sup>
1
</sup>
</p>
<p>
Revolutions are constantly brewing in South America due to the crime and corruption that exist and to the cruel dictatorships that have ruled. In Gallegos’ first novel,
<i>
El último solar
</i>
, we see all the corrupt politicians, the disillusioned dissident artists, and the neurotic revolutionaries to make Venezuela ripe for the latter group. “Se vislumbre ya en Venezuela fusca, enjambre pululante de politicos, de artistas desconforme, deilusilusionados, y de revolucionarios incurablemente neuroticos.
<sup>
2
</sup>
Rómulo Gallegos knows the psychology behind these
<i>
haciendas
</i>
or
<i>
hatos
</i>
inside and out. Thus, he writes with powerful authority. (A
<i>
hato
</i>
is similar to a ranch. It has much land and the peons live on it in separate dwellings. It is also known for raising cattle.)
</p>
<p>
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
belongs to the regionalistic category of novels due to the fact that “the landscape molds and frequently overshadows, character.”
<sup>
3
</sup>
Such was the famous Do–a Bárbara: lusty, superstitious, greedy, and cruel; and there at the bottom of her soul, there shined a pure and painful little thing—the memory of Asdrúbal, the frustrated love which could have changed her whole life. She is also like the Orinoco and Guain’a Rivers, whose waters are different colors. These rivers meet in the heart of the jungle, yet they do not mix. Each maintains its own color. “El Orinoco es un rio de ondas leonadas, el Guain’a, las arrastra negras. En el corozón de la selva, aguas de aquel se reunen con las de éste; más por largo trecho corren sin mezclarse conservando cada cual su peculiar coloracion.”
<sup>
4
</sup>
Along the same vein, the novel depicts struggles of opposing forces such as city versus hinterland, civilization versus barbarism (Bárbara), Europe versus South America. Gallegos also presents the class structure along with its social problems. These are portrayed in the decadent caretakers, the adventurous Indians, the mulatto servants and the rural bandits and parasites.
</p>
<p>
Modern students will enjoy this story because they will see themselves in Venezuela. They will realize that the people of the world have much in common. For the benefit of Spanish teachers who do not know the work, a summary of the novel follows.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
is a novel of a modern day woman. The character represents
<i>
barbarism
</i>
. Her personality has been molded by her experiences and her environment. She is extremely strong emotionally and she lets nothing stand in her way. She seems to be a woman walking in a stupor, thus scruples are lacking. All she knows and does is evil.
</p>
<p>
The events that shape Do–a Bárbara take place when she is very young. She grows up among contrabandists and bandits who intend to sell her to a sadistic leper. Asdrúbal, a young man who tries to liberate her from this tragic destiny, is killed, and Bárbara is brutally violated by crew members of a pirogue.
</p>
<p>
Many years later, we see Do–a Bárbara as a powerful
<i>
cacique
</i>
of a large ranch with much land which she has obtained through illicit means from Lorenzo Barquero, one of her first victims, who now lives with his daughter Marisela in a broken down hut as the
<i>
ex-hombre
</i>
. Marisela, a wild young thing, is the unacknowledged and illegitimate daughter of Do–a Bárbara.
</p>
<p>
Do–a Bárbara avenges the death of Asdrúbal by destroying every man that happens to cross her path. She has some of the men killed off: one of these, a colonel who wrote the papers for the land deal, she has buried alive with his horse by a man named M’ster Danger. Others she uses as instruments to fulfill her evil means and purposes, such as Balbino Paiba. But the worst off is Lorenzo Barquero, who had fallen in love with her. He is now consumed by alcohol and is reduced to a state of nothingness.
</p>
<p>
Finally, on the scene comes Santos Luzardo, a young lawyer who tries to tame the
<i>
llano
</i>
by putting an end to the plundering and to the corruption through legal means. But, alas, he becomes disillusioned and convinced that violence is the law of the
<i>
llano
</i>
.
</p>
<p>
Santos at the end is successful because Do–a Bárbara falls in love with him. She sees Asdrúbal in this young
<i>
llanero
</i>
. Bárbara tries to allure and attract Santos at first just with her womanly charms, but she fails because he has already fallen in love with her daughter Marisela. In fact, no matter what she does, she is always shunned by Santos.
</p>
<p>
The arrival of this young maverick touched off a progressive change in this beautiful, yet dangerous woman. She wants desperately to change by restoring her wealth to their proper owners. She realizes that she has changed when she tries to kill her daughter, but she can not pull the trigger. She wants to find a pure love, thus she can not return to her previous hideous state. Her only solution is to leave. Upon her departure, which is very mysterious, Do–a Bárbara leaves everything to her daughter.
</p>
<p>
Even the changing of the name of the ranch is symbolic. From
<i>
El Miedo
</i>
—
<i>
hato de Do–a Bárbara
</i>
(Fear, the ranch of Do–a Bárbara) to
<i>
Altamira
</i>
,
<i>
tierra de Luzardo
</i>
(Look up High, land of Luzardo).
</p>
<p>
Do–a Bárbara is a witch, so they say. The students will find the witchcraft and superstitions fascinating. A great deal can be done with the theme of the supernatural. The teacher can plan a field trip or have the students visit a health food store and make a list of all the herbs and roots which have special powers.
</p>
<p>
An excellent example of witchcraft in the novel is do–a Bárbara’s nightly meetings with
<i>
el Socio
</i>
. Another time, Bárbara tires of failing to allure Santos through feminine means. She then sends Juan Primito (
<i>
el bobo
</i>
—the stupid one) to get his measurement in order to make a doll in his likeness. Santos sees it as a big joke, but Marisela takes it very seriously. She goes to her mother’s ranch to take back the strings of measurements, thus Do–a Bárbara’s plan to bewitch him fails, and mother and daughter become physical. Santos puts an end to the fighting.
</p>
<p>
Then too, there is the theme of the
<i>
machismo
</i>
. The man has to prove that he has hair on his chest and that he is a
<i>
llanero
</i>
. Antonio Sandoval, one of Santos’ loyal peons, says: “Once a
<i>
llanero
</i>
always a
<i>
llanero
</i>
up to the fifth generation.” And at the rodeo, Santos amazes everyone and leaves no doubt in anyone’s mind about the extent of his manhood. This is a very prevalent theme in the story. It does not stop occurring until the end, when Do–a Bárbara makes the supreme sacrifice.
</p>
<p>
F.
<i>
Skit
</i>
(see Appendix II)
</p>
<p>
Many projects can be developed for this novel. A skit will be put on during this unit in order to have more direct participation on the part of the students. Before learning can occur, it must be first perceived through the senses. People learn more quickly and they retain more through direct involvement. Learning is an active process rather than a passive one.
</p>
<p>
This skit has been prepared basically to have the student learn vocabulary while at the same time practicing the spoken language. Most of it has been extracted from the dialogue that can be found in the novel, especially in pages one through fifty. This is not a complete skit. Many of the details surrounding the background must be obtained from reading the novel.
</p>
<p>
My intention here is to demonstrate how a novel can be converted into a play. Any teacher can very easily add on the rest of the plot by following the one already set up for you. Again, I want to reiterate that the complete novel must be read in order to recreate the scenes.
</p>
<p>
This acting will provide a knowledgeable relationship between the student and the novel. It will provide the students the opportunity of using and practicing and even mastering what is learned. The novel will become a reality due to this direct participation. I can not overly express the importance of this section. At the same time, I want to repeat that any novel can be used if the outline is followed, just as long as the main purpose of exposing the students to Latin-America literature is accomplished.
</p>
<h3>
III.
<i>
Sample Lesson Plans
</i>
</h3>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
<i>
Day One
</i>
<dt>
A. Introduce
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
I. Author: Rómulo Gallegos
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a. born in 1884
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
b. teacher, minister of education, journalist, elected President of Venezuela
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
c. period; 1920’s
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
d. problems in the novel: growing pains, rape, passion, witchcraft, etc.
<dt>
B. Introduce the geography of Venezuela
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Location on the map
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Capital: Caracas
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Rivers: Orinoco, Capanaporo, Cunaviche, Arauca, Cinaruco
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
4. Other cities and locations: San Francisco, Ciudad Bolivar, Manaos, Camajay-Minare
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
5. The Andes
<dt>
C. Assign research papers on the material covered
<dt>
D. Motion picture:
<i>
Geography of South America
</i>
(The Continent—14 minutes )
<dt>
<i>
Day Two
</i>
<dt>
A. Warm-up
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Review all the information from the previous day.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Have students add other information from their research papers.
<dt>
B. Introduce Natural Resources and Products
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Cocao bean, vanilla beans, pineapples, etc.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Oil
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Animals: alpaca, guaneco, llama, vicuna.
<dt>
C. Homework: have students make maps with legends
<dt>
D. Filmstrip:
<i>
Geography of South America
</i>
<dt>
<i>
Day Three
</i>
<dt>
A. Warm-up
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Review of all information
<dt>
B. History
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Simón Bol’var: independence
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. History of the period 1929
<dt>
C. Vocabulary
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. History of the language
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Regional vocabulary
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Vocabulary list
<dt>
D. Culture
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
1. Food:
<i>
arepa and hayacas
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
2. Musical instruments:
<i>
guitarra
</i>
,
<i>
quena, marimba
</i>
,
<i>
maracas, claves
</i>
,
<i>
güiro
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
3. Play the record Malagüena
<dt>
E. Homework: students research Venezuelan dishes and music
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
Notes
</h2>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1. Romulo Gallegos,
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
, (Argentina, 1968 ) p. 58.
<dt>
2. Angel Flores,
<i>
Historia y antologia del cuento y la novela en hispanoamerica
</i>
, ( New York, Las Americas Publishing Company, 1959) p. 439.
<dt>
3. Op. Cit. p. 31, 32.
<dt>
4. Op. Cit. p. 27.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<h3>
IV.
<i>
Teachers Bibliography
</i>
</h3>
Bernstein, Harry.
<i>
Venezuela and Colombia
</i>
. Englewoods Cliff, N. J.: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1964. A look at Venezuela today. Contrast between rich and poor, etc.
<p>
Englekirk, John.
<i>
An Outline History of Spanish American Literature
</i>
. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1965. Broad historical framework from discovery to independence along with literary and cultural information. Excellent guide.
</p>
<p>
Flores, çngel.
<i>
Histor’a y antolog’a del cuento y la novela en hispano-america
</i>
. New York: Las Americas Publishing Company, 1959. Excellent anthology for a better understanding of the Latin-American novel and short story.
</p>
<p>
Flores, çngel and Raúl Silva Caceres.
<i>
La novela hispano-americana actual
</i>
. Long Island City, New York: Las Americas Publishing Company, 1971. Introduction to modern novels of Latin America.
</p>
<p>
Franco, Jean.
<i>
The Modern Culture of Latin America: Society and the Artist
</i>
. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1967. Deals with political and social movements and involvements of the intellectuals.
</p>
<p>
Gallegos, Rómulo.
<i>
Cuentos venezolanos
</i>
. Argentina: Espasa-Calpe, 1950. Some of his short stories.
</p>
<p>
Hanke, Lewis.
<i>
History of Latin-American Civilization: The Colonial Experience (volume 1)
</i>
. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1967. Civilization of S. A. beginning with the discovery. Also deals with legends and myths.
</p>
<p>
Lieuven, Edwin.
<i>
Venezuela
</i>
. New York: Oxford University Press, 1961. Physiography of Venezuela with historical background.
</p>
<p>
Mac Adam, Alfred J.
<i>
Modern Latin-American Narratives
</i>
. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1977. Modern Latin-American narratives with critical analysis.
</p>
<p>
Mora, José R. Barrios.
<i>
Comprendio Histórico de la Literature Venezolana.
</i>
Caracas, Venezuela: Ediciones Nueva Cadiz, 1955. Historical movements that have influenced the literary trends.
</p>
<p>
Rourke, Thomas.
<i>
Gomez: Tyrant of the Andes
</i>
. New York: Greenwood Press Publishers, 1969. History of Venezuela and the cruel dictatorial government of Juan Vicente Gomez.
</p>
<p>
Urena, Pedro Henriquez.
<i>
A Concise History of Latin-American Culture
</i>
. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966. The indigenous cultures and their influences in modern day society.
</p>
<p>
Wagley, Charles.
<i>
The Latin-American Tradition
</i>
. New York: Columbia University Press, 1968. Essays on the unity and the diversity of Latin-America.
</p>
<h3>
V.
<i>
Teachers’ and Students’ Bibliography
</i>
</h3>
Alegr’a, Ciro.
<i>
El mundo es ancho y ajeno
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Losada, 1961. Pro-Indian novel of social protest which contains many passages of very poetic prose and sensitive symbolism.
<p>
Azuela, Mariano.
<i>
Los de abalo
</i>
. Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1961. Reveals the bloodshed and horror of the revolution.
</p>
<p>
de la Cruz, Sor Juana Inés.
<i>
Obras escogidas
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Espasa-Calpe, 1951. Poems written by a Mexican nun famed for her beauty. Her poems include love lyrics that at times border on the erotic.
</p>
<p>
Dar’o, Rubén.
<i>
Azul.
</i>
Buenos Aires: Espasa-Calpe, 1952. A famous collection of verse and prose which set the stage for modernism.
</p>
<p>
EcheverrEia, Esteban.
<i>
La cautiva, Seguido de El matadero, La güitarra
</i>
,
<i>
Elvira, Rimas
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Sopena, 1939.
<i>
Elvira
</i>
is the story of a love affair between an Indian girl and a creole boy.
</p>
<p>
Gallegos, Romulo.
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Espasa-Calpe, 1968.
</p>
<p>
Güiraldes, Ricardo.
<i>
Don Segundo Sombra
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Editorial Losada, 1939. A poeticization and immortalization of the essential and vital aspects of Argentina’s gauchesque prose.
</p>
<p>
Hernández, José.
<i>
Mart’n Fierro
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Espasa-Calpa, 1938. An epic poem about the gaucho of Argentina. Very colorful.
</p>
<p>
Isaacs, Jorge.
<i>
Mar’a
</i>
. Madrid: Aguilar, 1945. An idyllic romance story with many autobiographical details.
</p>
<p>
Mármol, José.
<i>
Amalia
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Estrada, 1944.
<i>
Amalia
</i>
is a novel about life in Buenos Aires under the Rosas reign of terror.
</p>
<p>
Márquez, Gabriel Garc’a.
<i>
El coronel no tiene quien le escriba
</i>
. Argentina: Editorial Sudamerica, 1971. The life of a colonel.
</p>
<p>
Márquez, Gabriel Garc’a,
<i>
La hojaresca
</i>
. Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana, 1977. How a town acts when the doctor dies.
</p>
<h3>
VI.
<i>
Classroom Materials
</i>
</h3>
Most of the audiovisual materials listed are available from the Department of Audiovisual Education at Winchester School in New Haven.
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
Filmstrips
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
Animal Life in South America
</p>
<p>
Balboa and Pizarro
</p>
<p>
Central America A.
</p>
<p>
Central America B.
</p>
<p>
Columbus
</p>
<p>
Columbus and the Discovery of America
</p>
<p>
Coronado
</p>
<p>
Cortes
</p>
<p>
Cortes and the Conquest of Mexico
</p>
<p>
Cortes Conquers the Aztecs
</p>
<p>
DeLeon and De Soto
</p>
<p>
Farm Land and Southern South America
</p>
<p>
Geography of South America
</p>
<p>
Historic Background
</p>
<p>
Indians of Mexico Today
</p>
<p>
Industries and Products
</p>
<p>
Mexican Town and Country Life
</p>
<p>
Mexico City
</p>
<p>
Mexico part A
</p>
<p>
Mexico part B
</p>
<p>
New World is Discovered
</p>
<p>
Panama
</p>
<p>
Panama Canal Zone
</p>
<p>
People of South America
</p>
<p>
Pizarro and the Conquest of Peru
</p>
<p>
Puerto Rico
</p>
<p>
Spanish Explorations
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
Filmstrip and Record
</i>
(by subject)
</i>
</b>
<br/>
Man and His Music ( Puerto Rico )
</p>
<p>
Children’s Songs of Mexico
</p>
<p>
Puerto Ricans I
</p>
<p>
Puerto Ricans II
</p>
<p>
Northern Mexico and the Central Highlands—The Historic Triangle
</p>
<p>
Mexico City, Cuernavaca and Pueblo
</p>
<p>
Taxco, A Spanish Colonial City
</p>
<p>
Southern Mexico, The lowlands and Yucatan Peninsula.
</p>
<p>
An Oil Company Family of Venezuela
</p>
<p>
A Family of Ecuador in Transition
</p>
<p>
Making of Bridges (United Fruit Company in Latin-America)
</p>
<p>
Folk Songs of Latin America
</p>
<p>
Juan of the Argentine Pampas
</p>
<p>
Clara Mita of the Andes
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
Motion Pictures
</i>
(by subject)
</i>
</b>
<br/>
<i>
Geography of South America (Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay
</i>
) (10 min.) It describes the industry and locates the rivers. At the same time it contrasts the people and the land.
</p>
<p>
<i>
Geography of South America (The Continent
</i>
) (14 min) Important port cities.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
Maps
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
Maps of Mexico, Central and South America and the Antilles
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
APPENDIX I: Sample Vocabulary List (Chapter VI)
</h2>
<i>
El recurdo de Asdrubal
</i>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
obscurecida—(obscurecer) darken, obscured
<dt>
Brujeador—warlock
<dt>
cuentas—computations, account
<dt>
rendir—to subject, to subdue
<dt>
tumbarse—to tumble, to throw down, to overwhelm
<dt>
cobija—a gutter tile, a small cloak for woman
<dt>
arrepentirse—to repent, to express sorrow for having said or done
<dt>
simpatizar—to be congenial, to have a liking for
<dt>
tratar—to treat a subject, to discuss, to consult
<dt>
sorna—sluggishness, laziness, slowness
<dt>
enjugar—to dry in the air or at the fire
<dt>
manotadas—blow with the hand, cuff
<dt>
gruesos—bulky, corpulent, fat
<dt>
bigotes—mustache
<dt>
impregnados (impregnar)—to impregnate
<dt>
caldo—broth, bouillon
<dt>
grasiento—greasy, filthy, grimy
<dt>
arrojar—to dart, a launch
<dt>
mordez—corrosive, biting, nipping; sarcastic
<dt>
reticencia—reticence, concealment by silence
<dt>
bolsillo—purse, pocket, money
<dt>
faja—band, bandage, a belt
<dt>
apiladas (apilar)—to heap up, to put one thing upon another
<dt>
soslayo—slant, obliquity, askew
<dt>
aludir—to allude, to refer to
<dt>
enterrar—to bury
<dt>
masticar—to chew
<dt>
trozo—piece
<dt>
apartar—to part, to separate
<dt>
codiciosa—greedy, covetous, avaricious
<dt>
brusca—bevel sweep, or rounding of masts, yards, etc.
<dt>
ce–o—frown, a supercilious look
<dt>
aletazo—stroke of the wing, flapping
<dt>
gavilán—sparrow, hawk
<dt>
chanzas—joke, jest, fun
<dt>
amante—lover
<dt>
ternezas—softness, delicacy, plaintness, tenderness
<dt>
disimulo—dissimulation, reservedness; tolerance
<dt>
torpe—slow, dull, heavy
<dt>
jactancioso—boastful, vainglorious; arrogant, ostentatious
<dt>
desperdiciar—to squander, to misspend
<dt>
aparentar—to make a false show
<dt>
ascendiente—an ancestor, forefather; ascendency, influence, power
<dt>
alardes—review of soldiers, muster, parade; ostentation, boasting
<dt>
chasco—fun, a trick, a sham; foil frustration
<dt>
avara—avaricious, covetous, niggard, miserly
<dt>
soler—to be used to
<dt>
cobrar—to recover, to collect
<dt>
minuciosamente—superfluously, exactly
<dt>
entregar—to deliver, to give
<dt>
descuido—carelessness, indolence, negligence
<dt>
precaria—precarious, held only as a loan and at the will of owner
<dt>
capricho—a caprice, whim
<dt>
mayordom’a—administration, controllership
<dt>
prosguir—to pursue, to prosecute
<dt>
evadir—to evade, to escape, to flee from danger
<dt>
sumamente—chiefly, extremely, highly
<dt>
pario—sparing, scanty, sober, moderate
<dt>
atenta—your favor
<dt>
palante—para adelante
<dt>
pleitos—covenant, contract, bargain. Litigation
<dt>
bongo—Indian canoe
<dt>
Chigüire—animal of South America
<dt>
calar—to penetrate, to pierce, to perforate, to plug
<dt>
acurrucarse—to muffle one’s self up
<dt>
caney—a log cabin
<dt>
calenturas—fever, warmth, gentle heat
<dt>
ajenas—another’s. Foreign, strange
<dt>
dicho—saying. to slacken, to relax
<dt>
aflojar—to loosen; to slacken to relax
<dt>
arrebiatar—to adhere to another’s opinion
<dt>
arriesgar—to risk, to hazard to expose to danger
<dt>
tortuosos—tortuous, winding
<dt>
agazapados (agazapar) to nab a person. To hide oneself
<dt>
ademanes—gestures
<dt>
hombr’a—probity, honesty
<dt>
buida—thin, lean, slender
<dt>
atroz—atrocious
<dt>
agacharse—to stoop, to squat, to crouch
<dt>
zambo—bandy-legged. Applied to the child of a Chinese and an Indian
<dt>
patquines—setrimetre
<dt>
talludito—grown into long stalks, tall, slender
<dt>
empinar—to raise, to exalt
<dt>
sentencioso—sententious, pithy, axiomatic
<dt>
urdir—to warp, to dispose threads for the loom
<dt>
altercado—altercation, wrangle, quarrel
<dt>
tragar—to swallow
<dt>
asombro—dread, fear, terror
<dt>
recelo—misgiving, suspicion
<dt>
catire—blond mulatto
<dt>
faz—face
<dt>
bronco—rough, coarse, unpolished
<dt>
mugido—the lowing of an ox, cow, or bull
<dt>
raudales—torrent, rapid stream
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<hr/>
<h2>
APPENDIX II: SKIT
</h2>
<i>
Do–a Bárbara
</i>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
(Una piragua con seis hombres y un capitán que lo llamaba
<i>
Taita
</i>
.)
<dt>
Asdrúbal: Necesito ir a Maneos y no tengo para el pasaje. Se usted me hace el favor de llevarme hasta Rio Negro, yo estoy dispuesto a corresponderle con trabajo. Desde cocinero hasta contador, en algo puedo serle útil.
<dt>
Capitán: Está bien. Vamonos.
<dt>
Barbarita: No me mires as’, porque ya mi taita se esta poniendo malicioso.
<dt>
Asdrubal: Pérdoname pero es que eres tan bonita. Yo te voy a ense–ar a leer y a escribir.
<dt>
Barbarita: Ay, s’, eso me encanterá. Pero, tambien cúentame algo sobre tu vida.
<dt>
Capitán: (a parte) Me arrepiento de haber acoplado al joven cuyos servicios pueden resultarme caros especialmente eso de ense–ar a la guaricha.
<dt>
Asdrúbal: Mi padrastro era un tirano. La vida con el me obligó a abandonar el hogar materno. He tenido muchas aventuras tristes: el errar sin rumbo, el hambre y el desamparo: Trabajé duramente en las minas del Yuruari; y después luché con la muerte en el camastro de un hospital. Voy a ir a Manaos en busca de la fortuna. Ya estoy cansado de la vida errante. Renunciaré a ella, se consagraré al trabajo. (Después de mirarla un rato) ¿Sabes lo que piensa hacer contigo el capitan?
<dt>
Barbarita: ¡Mi taita!
<dt>
Asdrúbal: No merece que lo llames as’. Piensa venderte al turco, el sirio sadico y leprono enriquecido en la explotación del balata, que habita en el corozón de la selva orinoque–a, aislado de los hombres por causa del mal que lo devora. ( Se acerca el capitán).
<dt>
Capitán: Bueno, joven, ya usted ha conversado bastante. Ahora vamos para que haga algo mas productivo. El Sapo va a buscar una poca de serrapia que deben de tenernos por aqu’ y usted lo va a acompa–ar. (Y poniéndole el rifle en las manos) ésto es para que se defienda, si los atacan.
<dt>
Asdrúbal: Deje eso para mas después, capitán. Ahora estamos descansando.
<dt>
Capitán: No, se tiene que hacer ahora mismo.
<dt>
Barbarita: (despues de oir el disparo) ¡Ah, no, no! Ya cabo . . . Ya cabo. (gritando y llorando, los hombres se la llevaron).
<dt>
Otra escena (muchos a–os después)
<dt>
Santos: (llegando a los llanos en un bongo) Después de que mi padre mató a mi hermano, mi madre me llevó a Caracas para estúdiar. La lucha entre mi padre y mi hermano fue una cosa estupida y fue instigada por mi primo, Lorenzo Barquero. Hab’a siempre una lucha entre la familia sobre la tierra.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Mis padres, duenos de Altamira, estaban siempre litigando con los amos de la Barquere–a, mis t’os. Ahora regreso a Altamira porque quiero venderla. No quiero confrontarme con la barbaridad y la violencia que existen en los llanos. (desembarca)
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
(Hay un grupo de hombres—peónes. Entre los cuales están el Brujeador de El Miedo, y Antonio Sandoval, viejo amigo y el becerrero de Altamira.)
<dt>
Santos: Antonio, amigo.
<dt>
Antonio: (no lo reconoce) Buenos D’as, Se–or. (Santos le echa los brazostal como lo hac’a cuando era joven para despedirse de él.
<dt>
Antonio emocionado, murmura) ¡Santos!
<dt>
Santos: No has cambiado de fisonom’a, Antonio.
<dt>
Antonio: Usted si que es otra persona. Tanto, que si no hubiera sido porque sab’a que ven’a en el bongo no lo habr’a reconocido.
<dt>
Santos: ¿De modo que no te he cogido de sorpresa? ¿Como supiste que venia?
<dt>
Antonio: Parece que la noticia la trajo a El Miedo el peón que acompanaba al Brujeador.
<dt>
Santos: ¡Ah! S’. Eran dos y uno ha debido de venirse anoche mismo por tierra.
<dt>
Antonio: A m’ me dio el pitazo Juan Primito, un bobo de alla de El Miedo, que todo lo descubre y es un telégrafo para transmitir novedades. Por cierto que me he pasado todo el d’a preocupado por causa de ese empe–o del Brujeador de venirse con usted en el bongo. De eso estábamos hablando cuando sonó la guarura, yo y mi valet Carmelito. ( lo presenta)
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Arr’mese, vale Carmelito López. Un hombre en quien puede confiarse con los ojos cerrados. Es de los nuevos; pero luzardero, tambien, hasta los tuetanos.
<dt>
Carmelito: A su mandar.
<dt>
Antonio: Los caballos están allá. Vamonos.
<dt>
Carmelito: ¡Hum! (entre dientes y detrás) ¿Y éste es el hombre de quien tanto esperábamos? Con este patiquincito presumido como que no se va a ninguna parte.
<dt>
Otra escena (llegan a la casa de Antonio. Melesio es el padre del peon.)
<dt>
Santos: ¡Viejo Melesio! ¡Sin una cana todavia!
<dt>
Melesio: Indio no las pinta, nino Santos (riéndose). Conque no se hab’a olvidado de mi el ni–o Santos’ Deeme que lo mente a asina, como de peque–ito lo he mentado, hasta que me vaya haciendo a llamarlo dotol. Usted sabe que los viejos semos duros de boca para coger los pasos nuevos.
<dt>
Santos: D’game como mejor le parezeca, viejo.
<dt>
Melesio: Siempre habrá respeto, ¿verdad, nino? Vengo para que se repose en casa, un saltico aunque sea, antes de seguir para la suya.
<dt>
Santos: ¡Altamira! ¡Los a–os que note ve’a!
<dt>
Melesio: (De las puerta de las casas aparecen las muchachas) Son mis nietas. Muchachas cimarronas como decimos por aqu’. En toda la tarde no han hecho sino aguaitar para el r’o, esperándolo a usted, y ahora que llega, se esconden.
<dt>
Santos: ¿Hijas tuyas, Antonio?
<dt>
Antonio: No, se–or. Yo todav’a ando escotero, a Dios gracias.
<dt>
Melesio: De los otros hijos. De los difuntos, que en paz descansen. Salgan pajuera, muchachas. No sean tan camperusas. Arr’mense para que saluden al dotol. (Las ocho nietas disimulan su timidez riendo y empujandose unas a otras.) Sali tu primero, chica. (Por fin, aparecen en hilera con una misma frase.)
<dt>
Las nietas: (una a la vez) ¿Cómo está?
<dt>
Melesio: ésta es Gervasia, la de Manuelito. ésta es Francisca, la de Andrés. Ramona, Genoveva, Altagracia . . .  Las novillas sandovaleras, como lo dicen por aqu’. En mautes no tengo sino estos tres zagalotes que le sacaron sus macundos del bongo. La herencia que me dejaron los hijos: once bocas con sus dientes completos.
<dt>
Santos: Tiene usted una familia que da gusto, Melesio. Fuerte y sana. Se ve que por aqui no reina el paludismo.
<dt>
Melesio: Voy a decirle, nino Santos. Es verdad que por aqu’ no es enfermizo como por esos otros llanos que usted ha atravesado; pero a nosotros también nos jeringa el paludismo. Yo, que le estoy hablando, once hijos tuve y siete de ellos llegaron a hombre. Usted debe recordarlos. Pues hoy solo me queda Antonio. Y asina como le hablo yo, le pueden hablar también muchos otros. Lo que sucede es que habemos personas que le damos fiebre a la calentura. En buena hora lo haiga dicho, por todos los que estamos presentes, con el favor de Dios. Pero con los demas hace su juego el paludismo. No tiene sino que mirar como me he quedado con el mautaje solamente. El ganado grande: los hijos y las mujeres de los hijos, me lo arraso el guasano.
<dt>
Santos: ¡Pero! Cuántos abuelos no lo envidiaran, Melesio, al verlo rodeado de tantas nietas bonitas.
<dt>
Genoveva: Con sus favores.
<dt>
Nelesio: ¡Hum! No se este creyendo que eso es una ventaja. Ojalá me hubieran dejado con un hatajo de feas, porque esas se pastorean sin mucho trabajo. Viceversa, ni dormir completo puedo. Toda la noche tengo que estar como el alcaravan! ¡o’do al zorro! Y de rato en rato me tiro del chinchorro y voy a darles una recorrida contándola una por una, a ver si están completas las ocho.
<dt>
Las nietas: ¡Jesús taita! Las cosas suyas.
<dt>
Melesio: (una de la muchacha con una taza de café) Va usted a beber en la misma taza en que beb’a su padre a quien Dios tenga en su gloria. Desde entones, nadie mas la ha usado. (Y en seguida) ¡Conque no me mor’ sin ver al ni–o Santos!
<dt>
Santos: gracias, viejo.
<dt>
Melesio: No tiene que darlas nino. Luzardero nac’ y en esa ley tengo que morir. Por estos lados, cuando se hab’a de nosotros los Sandovales, dicen que y que tenemos marcado en las nalgas el jierro de Altamira. ¡Je! ¡Je!
<dt>
Santos: Siempre han sido ustedes muy consecuentes con nosotros. Es la verdad.
<dt>
Melesio: Es buena hora lo diga, para que estos muchachos que lo estan escuchando sigan siempre por el mismo rumbo. S’, se–or. Consecuentes semos y siempre lo hemos sido: hablando cuando nos toca y callados cuando no nos preguntan; pero cumpliendo siempre el deber en lo que nos corresponde. ¿Que hay cosas de cosas? ¡No, se–or!; lo que siempre le he dicho a Antonio: los Sandovales con los Luzardos, hasta que ellos nonos boten.
<dt>
Santos: Bueno, viejo.
<dt>
Antonio: Ahora no estan preguntándonos.
<dt>
Santos: Comprendo viejo. Y reconozco que el verdadero culpable soy yo, pues estando ustedes aqu’, nadie mejor para haberles confiado mis interes. Pero la verdad es que nunca me ocupé ni quise ocuparme de Altamira.
<dt>
Antonio: Sus estudios, que no le dejaban tiempo.
<dt>
Santos: Y el despego de esta tierra.
<dt>
Melesio: Eso s’ es malo, ni–o Santos.
<dt>
Santos: Y ya me doy cuenta de lo tirante que ha debido de ser la situación de ustedes en Altamira.
<dt>
Antonio: Sosteniendo el barajuste, como dicen.
<dt>
Melesio: Y que han sido pocas las atropelladas. Antonio, mijo, principalmente, ha tenido que dejarse supiritar, sobre todo por el don Balbino, y hasta aparentarse enemigo de usted para que no lo despidiera.
<dt>
Antonio: Con todo y eso, ayer quiso arreglarme mi cuenta.
<dt>
Santos: Pues ahora serás tu quien le arreglara la suya. Ha hecho bien en no venir a recibirme y ojalá se le occura marcharse antes de que llegue, porque, después de todo, que cuentas puede rendirme, que no sean de las que siempre me rindieron sus antecesores, todas del Gran Capitán, ni que cargo puedo hacerle, si de todas sus piller’as el verdadero culpable soy yo.
<dt>
Garmelito: (esta aparte) ¿No le dije? Ya el hombre esta deseando que no se le presenten dificultades con el mayordomo. La resla no manca: con los patiquines no hay esperanza. A quien van a tener que arreglarle su cuenta, y esta noche mismo, es a mi, porque de madrugada voy a estar enillando.
<dt>
<i>
Escena tres
</i>
<dt>
Santos: ¡Se acabó esto! A que ha venido si aqu’ no hay nada que salvar?
<dt>
Antonio: Hágase cargo. Por un lado, do–a Bárbara y por el otro una Runfla de mayordomos, a cual mas ladrones, haciendo de las suyas con el ganado de acá. Y como si fuera poco, los cuatreros del Cunaviche metiéndose en Altamira, como r’o en conuco, cada vez que les da la gana; los revolucionrios por un lado y por el otro las comisiones del Gobierno que vienen a buscar caballos y de aqu’ es de donde se los llevan, porque do–a Bárbara para que no le quiten los suyos, las endilga para acá.
<dt>
Santos: El desastre. ¡Y yo en Caracas tan tranquilo!
<dt>
Antonio: Pero todav’a queda, doctor. Puras cimarroneras y a Dios gracias, porque si no, a estas horas tambien le habrán manoteado esas reses. Y si se hubiera dilatado en venir unos d’as más, ni eso habr’a encontrado, pues ya el don Balbino ten’a dispuesto empezar a darles choques a las cimarroneras para repart’rselas con do–a Bárbara. Por algo se ha enredado ella con el.
<dt>
Santos: ¡Como! ¡De modo que Paiba es el amante de turno de do–a Bárbara?
<dt>
Antonio: ¿Pero usted no lo sab’a, doctor? ¡Ah, caramba! Si por eso es que está el aqu’. A lo menos, la misma do–a Bárbara dice que fue ella quien hizo poner a Balbino en Altamira.
<dt>
Carmelito: Tenemos hombre. La raza de los Luzardos no se ha acabado todav’a.
<dt>
Antonio: (Al ver El Palmar de la Chusmita) !El maldito palmar! S’, se–or. Allá está purgando en vida su crimen el que azuzEo al hijo contra el padre—Lorenzo Barquero.
<dt>
Santos: ¿Vive todav’a el pobre Lorenzo?
<dt>
Antonio: Si se puede llamar vida el resuello, que es lo que le queda. El “espectro de la Barquere–a”, lo mentan por aqu’. Es una piltrafa de hombre. Dicen que fue do–a Bárbara quien lo puso as’; pero para mi que fue castigo de Dios, porque comenzó a secarse en vida desde la hora y punto en que el difinto don José lo clavó en el bahareque. Ahora quiero presentarle a Venancio, el amansador. Hijo de „o Venancio, el quesero. Se acuerda usted de „o Venancio?
<dt>
Santos: !Cómo no voy a acordarme! Gente de la casa desde tiempo inmemo rial.
<dt>
Venancio: Pues no tengo nada que decirle.
<dt>
Antonio: El cabrestero Maria Nieves llanero marrajo hasta el nombre que parece de mujer. Ya usted se irá dando cuenta de la clase de hombre que es. Yo no le presento sino lo bueno.
<dt>
Maria Nieves: Son favores suyos, Antonio. Aqu’ me tiene, pues para lo poco qie pueda serle útil.
<dt>
Pajarote: Con su licencia, doctor. Yo me voy a presentar yo mismo, no vaya a ser cosa uie mi vale Antonio le de malas recomendeciones porque ya le estoy viendo la bellquer’a pintada en los ojos. Soy Juan Palacios; pero me llaman Pajarote y as’ puede mentarme. No soy de la casa desde tiempo inmemorial, como usted acaba de decir, pero conmigo puede contar parq todo lo que se le ofrezca, porque yo no soy sino lo que me ve por encima. Y con está, si no es abuso, le entrego al zambo Pajarote. (le tende la mano)
<dt>
Antonio: (murmura) As’ se habla, Pajarote.
<dt>
Pajarote: ¡Gua, zambo! Las palabras son para decirlas.
<dt>
Santos: (retirándose a la casa) Por qué está esto tan solo? ¿Qué se han hecho los demás muchachos?
<dt>
Venancio: Se fieron. Apenas hab’an partido ustedes para El Paso, ensillaron y cogieron rumbo a El Miedo.
<dt>
Santos: ¿Y don Balbino? ¿No ha estado por aqui?
<dt>
Venancio: No. Pero eso es plan combinado por él. Yo hab’a maliciado ya que estaba consacando a los muchachos.
<dt>
Antonio: No se ha perdido gran cosa, pues toda era gente balbinera, bellaca, y manquareadora . . . . La mesa está servida.
<dt>
Santos: No tengo apetito.
<dt>
Antonio: El cansancio, que quita las ganas. Por esta noche tiene que aconodarse a dormir en esta pieza as’ como está, pues no tuvimos tiempo sino de barrerla. Ma–ana se procederá a darle una lechada a las paredes y a asearla un poco más. A menos que usted disponga hacerle una reparación general a la casa, porque, verdaderamente, as’ como está no puede habitarla.
<dt>
Santos: Por el momento dejemosla as’. Quizá venda el hato. Dentro de un mes pasará por aqu’ don Encarnación Matute, a quien le he propuesto que me compre Altamira y si me hace una oferta aceptable cerraré el negocio inmediatamente.
<dt>
Antonio: ¡Ah! ¿Conque piensa usted desprenderse de Altamira?
<dt>
Santos: Creo que es lo mejor que pueda hacer.
<dt>
Antonio: Usted que lo ha resuelto, as’ lo convendrá. (entregandole un manojo de llaves) Aqu’ tiene las llaves de la casa. Esta, más mohosa, es la de la sala. Puede que ya ni funcione, porque esa pieza no se ha vuelto a abrir. Ah’ todo está como lo dejó el difunto, que paz descanse.
<dt>
Santos: (Arroja la lanza lejos de s’) As’ como he hecho yo con esto, haz tu con ese rencor que hace poco te o’ expresar, que no es tuyo, por lo demás. Un Luzardo te lo impuso como un deber de lealtad; pero otro Luzardo te releva en este momento de esa monstruosa obligación. Ya es bastante con lo que han hecho los odios en esta tierra.
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Dispon lo necesario para que ma–ana se proceda a la reparación de la casa. Ya no venderé Altamira. (Volvió a meterse en la hamaca)
<dt>
<i>
Escena Cuatro
</i>
<dt>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
(La misma noche en el Miedo. Do–a Bárbara sentada a la mesa con Balbino. Entra Melqu’ades, El Brujeador.)
<dt>
Do–a Bárbara: Entra Melqu’ades.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Yo vuelvo más tarde. Siga comiendo tranquila.
<dt>
Do–a Bárbara: Entra Melqu’ades. No ten miendo, que aqu’ no hay perros.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Está seguro, don Balbino? Vine solamente a darle cuenta de que las bestias llegaron bien a San Franciso, y a entregarle lo suyo. Cuente a ver si esta completo.
<dt>
Do–a Bárbara: ¿Morocotas? Ojos que te vieron. Debe de estar completo. Usted nunca se equivoca, Melqu’ades. No tiene esa mala costumbre . . . Bueno Melqu’ades. ¿Qué más me cuentas? ¿Por que mandaste adelante al peon?
<dt>
Melqu’ades: ¿No le contó el?
<dt>
Do–a Bárbara: S’, me dijo algo; pero quiero que me refieras los detalles.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: (Sin mirarla nunca en los ojos) Pues en San Francisco escuché decir que hab’a llegado el doctor Santos Luzardo. Al verlo, fui a acurrucarme en el caney donde le iban a servir la comida, a escuchar lo que conversara.
<dt>
Do–a Bárbara: Y o’ste muchas cosas, seguramente. Ya me las imagino.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Pues para que vea: nada que valiera la pena de estar sudando calenturas ajenas, como dice el dicho. Pero, oyendo al doctorcito, que da gusto o’rlo cuando se le afloja la lengua, porque conversa muy sabroso, pense: Hombre que le gusta escucharse no puede estar callado mucho tiempo. La cuestión es tener paciencia y la oreja parada. Y anoche mismo le dije al peon: yo voy a ver si quepo en el bongo. Santos es hombre arriesgado y peligroso.
<dt>
Balbino: No se agache tanto, zambo. Ya sabemos que usted no es hombre para achicársele a patiquines.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Pues, mire, don Balbino. Voy a decirle. No es que me agacho, ¿sabe? Es que el hombre es talludito y además, se empina cuando hace falta.
<dt>
Balbino: Si es as’, ma–ana lo rebajaremos un poco, para emparejarlo.
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Acuérdese, don Balbino, de que siempre es mejor recoger que devolver.
<dt>
Balbino: No tenga cuidado, Melqu’ades. Yo sabré recoger ma–ana lo que sembré hoy . . .  Ma–ana muy temprano va a saber el doctor Lu zardo que clase de hombre es su mayordomo Balbino Paiba. (a D. Bárbara) ¿Qué pasa?
<dt>
D. Bárbara: Nada. El doctor Luzardo que ha querido dejarse ver. ( mirando siempre en el agua del vaso)
<dt>
Melqu’ades: ¡Simpático el catire! ¡Qué colorada tiene la cara! Se conoce que no está acostumbrado a los soles llaneros. ¡Y viste bien! (no muy alto) Perro no come perro. Que te crea Balbino. Todo eso te lo dijo el peon.
<dt>
Balbino: ¡Tres Divinas Personas! ¡Por si acaso! ¿No vas a terminar de comer?
<dt>
Melqu’ades: Si no tiene nada más que mandarme. Bueno, con su permiso, yo me retiro. Que la pase usted bien.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
</body>