---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 83.04.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1983/4/83.04.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Electronic Surveillance: Unlawful Invasion of Privacy or Justifiable Law Enforcement"
unitAuthor: "Willie J. Elder, Jr."
keywords: "Sixties History Civil Rights American Technology Law Enforcement Electronic Surveillance"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies grade 6"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 83.04.07:
</h4>
This unit is designed to make students aware of their rights as citizens of the United States.  The unit will place particular emphasis on the rights to privacy and the fourth amendment as applied to cases of electronic eavesdropping.  Also, the unit will list cases which can be used to view the role the Supreme Court has played in developing procedures for the protection of rights to privacy.  These cases will give a full account of specific situations wherein issues relating to privacy were taken up by the courts.
<p>
The unit will also discuss two major pieces of legislation that addressed the issue of electronic surveillance and protection from unlawful invasion.  Students can gain insight into lawmaking procedures and a greater understanding of our system of government in researching the legislative history of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, for example.  Finally, the unit lists strategies which can be employed to reach the goals of the unit. Lesson plans are also included; however, the information can be taught in a variety of methods.  The bibliography contains reading material which can serve as references to understanding invasive technology, court opinions, and legislation dealing with the matter.  Teachers and students should find this unit very enlightening.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Social Studies grade 6)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Sixties History Civil Rights American Technology Law Enforcement Electronic Surveillance
</i>
</p>
</body>