---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 98.02.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1998/2/98.02.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Three African Trickster Myths/Tales -- Primary Style"
unitAuthor: "Linda Frederick-Malanson"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: ""
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 98.02.04:
</h4>
This four-week curriculum details three myths/tales.  They are:
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.  Anansi's Rescue from the River, which is an Ashanti tale (Ghana) about a spider and his sons and the origin of the moon.
<dt>
2.  Ijapa and Yanrinbo Swear an Oath, which is an Yoruba tale (Nigeria) about two tortoises and how they outwitted others.
<dt>
3.  Zomo the Rabbit, which is in the Bantu tradition (Angola, Botswana, Gabon, South Africa, Uganda, and Zimbabwe) about a hare who wishes for wisdom.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
I have woven my topic through most of the various parts of the curriculum and have devised a sensible pacing chart for children.  It is very teacher-friendly, as I have created teacher-ready materials ready to use.  In my paper I have included an introduction, the three tales along with reading, social studies, game, language arts, mathematical and art activities and/or materials along with a comprehensive bibliography and appendix.
<p>
One week is spent on each tale using may activities.  During the fourth week the children are involved in the following:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.  A review of the three tales done orally.
<dt>
2.  Partner choice reading.
<dt>
3.  Comparisons of story elements.
<dt>
4.  Comparisons of the Ashantis, Yorubas &amp; Bantus.
<dt>
5.  Writing one's own trickster myth.
<dt>
6.  Game play - Oware(Ashanti)/Ayo(Yoruba)
<dt>
7.  A FINALE! (Art and/or dramatics)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
</body>