---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 90.06.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1990/6/90.06.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Genetics"
unitAuthor: "Lee Hotchkiss-Durward"
keywords: "Biology Human Genetics"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Biology, grade 10; Anatomy, Physiology, and Lab Technician, grade 11; and Parenting, grades 9-12"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 90.06.03:
</h4>
As the thread of life is being unraveled at a very steady pace, it has already become a part of our lives. Every day the media keeps us informed and we are expected to understand.
<p>
Medical genetics has been growing steadily. Many diseases have been shown to be genetic in origin, both mentally and physically. We should all be aware of the risk factors that could trigger certain diseases if we are planning on becoming parents. Although, as yet, there are no cures for genetic diseases, medicine can diagnose and detect genetic problems through modern technological devices. Some diseases especially of metabolic genetic origin can be held in check with the proper diet, if detected early enough.
</p>
<p>
This curriculum hopes to give students a basic knowledge of genetics from the cell and its DNA and how it function in protein formation and reproduction. Also a Mendelian understanding of the traits and their probabilities during fertilization. So, in today’s world, it is of vital importance to equip our students to have them genetically literate and better able to make decisions based on knowledge.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Biology, grade 10; Anatomy, Physiology, and Lab Technician, grade 11; and Parenting, grades 9-12)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Biology Human Genetics
</i>
</p>
</body>