---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 90.02.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1990/2/90.02.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "Pick-A-Path Playhouse"
unitAuthor: "Carol A. Wong"
keywords: "Acting Elementary Instruction Children’s Drama"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for “Enrichment,” grades K-3"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 90.02.04:
</h4>
“Pick-A-Path Playhouse” introduces students, grades K-3, to the dramatization of children’s literature. Working from the story as a play, students are encouraged to take on the role of playwright and substitute either a different setting, character, or plot line for the original. How will this change/alter the path of the story? Brain-storming “what if” possibilities and consequences, students practice the concept of theme and variation, creating many new playlet ideas from the original story. Alternatives are discussed and a pick-a-path play is selected by the class or group to enact. The process of play-acting is a wonderful experiential counterpart to the more thought-provoking task of choosing a new path for the story. This creative problem-solving process asks students to stretch their imaginations. It also requires them to develop their communication skills as actors connecting to their audience and to the other cast members.
<p>
The three books adapted for “Pick-A-Path Playhouse” are “Anansi the Spider” by Gerald McDermott, “Who’s in Rabbit’s House?” by Verna Aardema, and “The Mountain That Loved a Bird” by Alice McLerran. Each of these stories weaves its own special magic as children’s literature. They provide a rich central focus to develop “Pick-A-Path Playhouse.” I have detailed a sequential five-day lesson plan of developmental drama activities as a guide for teachers, including ideas for the introduction and closure of each story.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for “Enrichment,” grades K-3)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Acting Elementary Instruction Children’s Drama
</i>
</p>
</body>