---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 90.02.02"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1990/2/90.02.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "Improvisional Drama-Without Words"
unitAuthor: "Sylvia C. Petriccione"
keywords: "Basic Improvisation Performance Drama Teaching Pantomime Staging"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Drama, Language Arts, Literature, and Reading, grades 2-6"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 90.02.02:
</h4>
The unit I have developed is centered on helping children to create their own pantomime. I will be using this unit with my dance and drama classes. Each class runs thirty-five to forty-five minutes long, once a week. This drama unit will span an eight week or longer period. It may be used with students in most grade levels. I see it being taught in grades one through six, with minor modifications. I plan to use it with my third, fourth and fifth grade students.
<p>
Although it is a drama unit, I feel it can compliment other subject areas. A few examples of this can be found within my unit. The skills that are taught throughout the unit will notably apply to any learning environment. Included in my unit are a series of drama games and activities that will lead my students to an improvisational mime. These activities have all been clearly developed and stated in a sequential manner. The reader will not need any previous experience in drama to teach this unit.
</p>
<p>
In summarizing, my unit states a brief history of mime, and objectives and strategies in aiding the dramatic process. I feel it is a significant and fun way to approach learning. It is a learning process that will benefit many students.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Drama, Language Arts, Literature, and Reading, grades 2-6)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Basic Improvisation Performance Drama Teaching Pantomime Staging
</i>
</p>
</body>