---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 19.01.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2019/1/19.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Digital Lives and the Impact of Technology: Utopia or Dystopia?"
unitAuthor: "Eden C. Stein"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Developed for English Language Arts, grade 8; recommended for English, grades 7-10" 
---
<main>
        <p>This unit facilitates students in studying the positive and negative effects of society&rsquo;s current preoccupation with digital media, with specific focus on teenagers.<span>&nbsp; </span>Students will be introduced to the concept of Utopia via an excerpt from Thomas More and the song &ldquo;Imagine&rdquo; by John Lennon.<span>&nbsp; </span>The class will then proceed to research historical Utopian communities such as the Amish and the Shakers among others.<span>&nbsp; </span>Following this the class will be encouraged to engage in a self-reflection on digital use.<span>&nbsp; </span>Research will be conducted on the potential positive effects of digital media, such as for academic research and learning, safety and self-help, as well as negative consequences of excessive digital media use noted in the literature such as effects on attention span, psychosocial functioning, and behavioral addiction.<span>&nbsp; </span>Strategies used during the nonfiction portion of the unit will include a minimum of teacher presentation, with an emphasis on individual and group research, student-created multimedia presentations, note taking, class discussions, and reflective writing. Then the unit will delve into the prevalence and fascination with dystopian literature and study a classic science fiction story, &ldquo;The Veldt&rdquo; by Ray Bradbury, and discuss the role of technology in this dystopia.<span>&nbsp; </span>Finally, students will write their own stories imagining how digital technology will impact a future that may occur in their lifetimes.</p>
<p></p>
<p>(Developed for English Language Arts, grade 8; recommended for English, grades 7-10)</p>
</main>
