---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 19.01.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2019/1/19.01.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "The iGen: Freeing Their Voice in Cyberspace and the Theater Space"
unitAuthor: "Christi Pidskalny Sargent"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Developed for Theater Studies I, grade 9; recommended for Theater and Social Sciences, grades 9-12" 
---
<main>
        <p>All things in moderation. This phrase is typically heard in reference to a person&rsquo;s diet or exercise habits. Given the tremendous rise in social media use among adolescents, moderation is something that can also be practiced in our relationships with the digital world. My theater students' social lives occur predominately online through various social media like&nbsp;SnapChat&nbsp;or Instagram. The relentless comparisons they make between themselves and their peers is correlated to a feeling of unworthiness. In my classroom, I often hear my students say, &ldquo;I am not good enough&rdquo; or &ldquo;I am not as pretty or talented as...&rdquo; Theatre is an art that should help students find the power of their own voices. However, this can only happen if a student is open to the exploration of the self. What if an oversaturation of social media is blocking my students from digging into their identities because they feel as if their &ldquo;self&rdquo; could never possibly be good enough?&nbsp; This unit seeks to guide my students on a journey of self-exploration in order to create a healthier relationship with social media. Ultimately, I want my students to feel worthy enough to participate fully in the art of theatre. For this to happen, my students need to break down the emotional blocks built by social comparisons that happen through social media.&nbsp;</p>
<p></p>
<p>(Developed for Theater Studies I, grade 9; recommended for Theater and Social Sciences, grades 9-12)</p>
</main>
