---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 03.05.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2003/5/03.05.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Kids Conserve… Water Preserved"
unitAuthor: "Sharron Solomon-McCarthy"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science and Mathematics, both Special and Regular Education, grades 5-6."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 03.05.09:
</h4>
<p>
This unit has been written as a teaching tool about water conservation and other water issues that relate to the above-referenced topic.
</p>
<p>
This is an integrated, multi-sensory unit, which will incorporate the two disciplines of science and mathematics.  For science the students are required to use and develop a critical understanding of the ecology in relation to natural resources, science and technology through personal and community health as it addresses present day and global challenges.  The math curriculum focuses on the students' ability to demonstrate a variety of skills in order to graph data and solve a variety of numerical equations.
</p>
<p>
This unit has been set up so that mastery learning can take place through various forms and media. The students will design a survey that will allow them to research their family behavior and water use in their homes on a daily basis.
</p>
<p>
This unit is designed for the population that I work with on a daily basis, which are special education students in sixth grade.  My students range in disabilities from learning difficulties to autism.  As a result I decided that a multi-sensory approach would be most suitable to meet the goals and objectives in each student's Individual Educational Plan.  Therefore, my unit will include various lessons, which will integrate the auditory, visual and kinesthetic methodologies of learning.  The lessons will be easy to execute for both the teacher and the students.  The lessons will be clear and concise with minimal instructions and materials. Based on the activity, if difficulty does arise, modifications will be made for individual students. I have designed the lessons so that every student can meet the tasks with success while learning and having fun.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Science and Mathematics, both Special and Regular Education, grades 5-6.)
</p>
</body>