---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 98.05.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1998/5/98.05.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "Celebrating Diversity through the Study of Nine American Holidays"
unitAuthor: "Bonnie Bielen Osborne"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: ""
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 98.05.08:
</h4>
This curriculum unit was developed to be used with special education students, grades six through twelve, in an alternative inner city public school servicing pregnant teens, and young mothers.  It would also be suitable for use in a regular class setting (with some modifications) as a unit of study included in an English class, history class, social development program, or as part of an arts curriculum.  The unit may be presented as a whole, encompassing two to three weeks of study, or as separate mini units interspersed throughout the year as holidays occur.
<p>
The main focus of the unit is to promote harmony and mutual understanding among people with diverse backgrounds; through the study of holidays celebrated in the United States.  The nine specific holidays included in the unit are the following:  Labor Day, Columbus Day, Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa, Three Kings Day, Chinese New Year, St. Patrick's Day, and Cinco de Mayo.  Each holiday section includes background information, pertinent holiday facts, and suggested reading titles to be used in the classroom.  Improvement in reading, writing, and thinking skills is an anticipated outcome of the unit.  An extensive annotated bibliography is included, along with examples of sample projects, activities, and tests.
</p>
</body>