---
layout: "page"
title: "National Demonstration Project"
path: "/ndp/ndp1999.html"
---
<main>
<p align="Center">
<a name="top"><b><big>A National Demonstration Project</big></b></a>
<br/><align=center>
of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
</align=center></p><p align="Center">
<b>1998-2002</b>
</p><hr/>
<p>
<b>Contents:</b>
</p><p>
<a href="#a">Aims of the Project</a>
<br/>
<a href="#b">Establishing the Project</a>
<br/>
<a href="#c">A League of Teachers Institutes</a><br/>
<ul>
    <li><a href="#d">Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</a></li>
    <li><a href="#e">Pittsburgh Teachers Institute</a></li>
    <li><a href="#f">Houston Teachers Institute</a></li>
    <li><a href="#g">Albuquerque Teachers Institute</a></li>
    <li><a href="#h">UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute</a></li>
</ul>
<a href="#i">Communication and Dissemination</a><br/>
<a href="#j">Documentation and Evaluation</a><br/>
<ul>
    <li><a href="#k">Internal Documentation and Evaluation</a></li>
    <li><a href="#l">External Evaluation</a></li>
</ul>
<a href="#m">Desired Outcomes</a><br/>
<a href="#n">Expansion and Affiliation</a><br/>
<a href="#o">Appendix: Basic Principles</a><br/>
<a href="#p">Contact Information</a>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<font color="#000000"><a name="a"><b>AIMS OF THE PROJECT</b></a></font>
</p><p>
The National Demonstration Project, supported by a four-year grant of $2.5
million from the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, aims to demonstrate
the feasibility of adapting at other sites the approach to teachers' professional
development that has been followed for more than two decades by the Yale-New
Haven Teachers Institute.
</p><p>
From its beginning in 1978, the overall purpose of the Teachers Institute
has been to strengthen teaching and learning in local schools and, by example,
in schools across the country. It places equal emphasis on teachers' increasing
their knowledge of a subject and on their developing teaching strategies
that will be effective with their students. At the core of the program is
a series of seminars on subjects in the humanities and sciences. Topics are
suggested by the teachers based on what they think could enrich their classroom
instruction. In the seminars, Yale faculty contribute their knowledge of
a subject, while the New Haven teachers contribute their expertise in elementary
and secondary school pedagogy, their understanding of the students they teach,
and their grasp of what works in the crucible of the classroom. Successful
completion of a seminar requires that the teachers, with guidance from a
Yale faculty member, each write a curriculum unit to be used in their own
classroom and to be shared with others in the same school and other schools
through both print and electronic publication.
</p><p>
Throughout the seminar process teachers are treated as colleagues. Unlike
conventional university or professional development courses, Institute seminars
involve at their very center an exchange of ideas among teachers and Yale
faculty members. The teachers admitted to seminars, however, are not a highly
selective group, but rather a cross-section of those in the system, most
of whom, like their urban counterparts across the country, did not major
in one or more of the subjects they teach. The Institute's approach assumes
that urban public school teachers can engage in serious study of the field
and can devise appropriate and effective curricula based on this study.
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>A meeting of teachers and directors of the five Teachers Institutes
in the Faculty Room of Connecticut Hall on Yale's Old Campus, July
1999.</small></i>
</p><p>
The National Demonstration Project includes four other sites where school
systems serve a significant number of students from low-income communities.
The Teachers Institute has awarded three-year Implementation Grants to: Chatham
College and Carnegie Mellon University, in partnership with the Pittsburgh
Public Schools; the University of Houston, in partnership with the Houston
Independent School District; the University of New Mexico, in partnership
with the Albuquerque Public Schools; and the University of California at
Irvine, in partnership with the Santa Ana Unified School District. At each
site the magnitude and the pattern of needs and resources differ from those
in New Haven; and yet at each site significant opportunities exist for devising
an appropriate scope and local strategies that, without departing from the
basic principles of the Teachers Institute, can meet those needs.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#a">to the top of Aims of the Project</a> | <a href="#top">to
the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="b"><b>ESTABLISHING THE PROJECT</b></a>
</p><p>
During 1997, with the support of a Planning Grant from the DeWitt
Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute explored
the feasibility and desirability of establishing new Teachers Institutes
at a number of sites. The Planning Team assisting in this effort included
James R. Vivian, Director of the Institute; Carla Asher, Program Officer,
DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund; faculty members from Yale University
who had led Institute seminars; teachers and an administrator from the New
Haven School system who had been Institute Fellows; and teachers, faculty
members, and administrators drawn from the Albuquerque, New Mexico school
system, the University of California at Irvine, and the University of Michigan.
The Teachers Institute compiled a preliminary list of hundreds of schools
and colleges from which, since 1978, it had received requests for assistance.
It then surveyed 33 sites to determine their interest in adapting the Institute
approach, sending to each both printed materials and videos to explain the
nature and process of the Institute. It also developed a list of categories
within which adaptations of the Institute should fall. Visits were then made
to five sites in order to communicate the nature of the National Demonstration
Project, to clarify and amplify the Institute's understanding of the issues
involved in adapting its model, and to begin to assess the desirability and
feasibility of participation by those sites.
</p><p>
Those visits and correspondence with additional sites led the Planning Team
to conclude that the time was right for the establishment of several
demonstration projects committed to the principles of collaboration that
the Institute had developed over the previous two decades. The Institute
therefore proposed to the Fund in October 1997 a four-year project that would
constitute a major step toward the nationwide establishment of such Teachers
Institutes. The Planning Team helped to prepare a Request for Proposals that
would specify the criteria essential to the Institute approach, which would
have to be met by any adaptation. Institute staff also developed the financial
requirements and expectations that would be part of the Request for Proposals.
The Institute's proposal to the Fund envisaged that, on the basis of proposals
for eight-month Planning Grants, a National Panel would recommend to the
Director of the Institute five or six sites that seemed most likely to deserve
subsequent three-year support and that should therefore receive Planning
Grants. During the balance of 1998 the Institute would work closely with
those sites, providing a variety of assistance. There would be a July Intensive
Session with National Seminars and other meetings to make possible first-hand
experience of the Institute's policies and procedures.
</p><p>
Three-year Implementation Grants would then be awarded to three sites, by
the same procedure as before. Those sites would work closely with the Institute
during the period from 1998 through 2001 as they prepared and launched their
own partnerships and their own annual seminars. They would maintain the
Institute's basic principles but would adapt their scopes and strategies
to fit their own resources and the needs of their specific locations. The
Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute would collaborate with the new Teachers
Institutes to provide continuing Directors' meetings, a National Steering
Committee of teachers, and a University Faculty Advisory Committee, as well
as another July Intensive Session in 1999, and three October Conferences
in 1999, 2000, and 2001 to share the ongoing challenges and results.
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>Plenary Session at the Intensive Session, July 1999.</small></i>
</p><p>
Because the ground would be prepared for a self-sustaining organization at
each of the demonstration sites, they could be expected to continue their
programs after the completion of the Grant period. The National Demonstration
Project would not only benefit the teachers and students in those communities;
it would also establish a potentially expandable network of Teachers Institutes
that should have a significant impact upon education reform throughout this
nation. The entire process would be documented by persons at the Teachers
Institute and at the demonstration sites, and by an external evaluation to
be commissioned by the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.
</p><p>
After the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute was awarded the four-year
Implementation Grant by the Fund in March 1998, it invited fourteen sites
to submit proposals for 8-month Planning Grants. It also activated an
Implementation Team, drawn from its Planning Team, which consists of Yale
faculty members, New Haven teachers, and New Haven school administrators.
The Implementation Team was charged with making further site visits during
the term of the Grant and assisting with the organization of the National
Seminars and the holding of other sessions in New Haven. In April, at a voluntary
Information Session in New Haven, the Teachers Institute offered further
explanations of its policies and procedures. In June a National Panel considered
the applications for Planning Grants. On recommendation of the Panel and
on the advice of the Program Officer from the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest
Fund, the Institute awarded Planning Grants to five applicants. It then asked
the sites that received Planning Grants to send teams comprised of a Planning
Director, university faculty members, and teachers to the July Intensive
Session in New Haven. During this ten-day event three National Seminars,
other meetings, and written projects for Planning Directors and university
faculty members enabled each site to assess the relevance of the New Haven
experience to its own needs and resources.
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>The Orientation Session held in January 1999 for the four sites
awarded Implementation Grants.</small></i>
</p><p>
In December, again on recommendation of the National Panel and on the advice
of the program officer of the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, the Teachers
Institute awarded Implementation Grants to the four partnerships that had
applied for them. The inclusion of four sites, instead of the three originally
envisioned in the Teachers Institute's proposal to the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's
Digest Fund, was made possible in part by a supplementary grant of $150,000
by the McCune Charitable Foundation. These new Teachers Institutes had all
committed themselves to the basic principles of the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute, as set forth in the Request for Proposals and repeated in slightly
condensed form in the Appendix to this brochure. They now set in motion the
planning for their first annual offering of seminars in 1999, and the Yale-New
Haven Teachers Institute began to work with them on their plans for the coming
years. In 1999 all five Institutes are coming together in New Haven for a
January Orientation Session, another July Intensive Session (on this occasion
with four National Seminars), and an October Conference to share their various
areas of major accomplishment.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#b">to the top of Establishing the Project</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="c"><b>A LEAGUE OF TEACHERS INSTITUTES</b></a>
</p><p>
Each of the five Teachers Institutes now established has a distinctive pattern
of needs and resources. Each is at a somewhat different stage of development
and illustrates a somewhat different pattern of relationship to local resources,
institutional apparatus, and state mandates. Each may therefore serve as
a somewhat different example for the establishment of Teachers Institutes
elsewhere in the United States. All four of the new Teachers Institutes are
serving school systems that are considerably larger than that of New Haven,
and each must also deal with certain of the serious problems associated with
low-income communities and a high proportion of racial and ethnic diversity.
They illustrate a variety of institutional arrangements. The institutions
of higher education include: in Pittsburgh a partnership between a private
university focused upon the sciences and a small liberal arts college; in
Houston a state-supported urban university; in Albuquerque a flagship state
university; and in Irvine a university that is part of a larger state system
and is collaborating with the nearby school district of Santa Ana. In contrast
to the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, the new Teachers Institutes will
show how a professional development program in the humanities and sciences
can exist in harmony with a school or department of Education. They also
illustrate different ways of providing for a full-time directorship, and
they are adopting an array of different scopes and strategies directed toward
having a significant impact upon a large school district. The following sections
of this brochure will provide basic information about each Teachers Institute,
sketch the programs being carried out during 1999, and describe more fully
the arrangements for communication, dissemination, documentation, and evaluation.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#c">to the top of A League of Teachers Institutes</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="d"><b>YALE-NEW HAVEN TEACHERS INSTITUTE</b></a>
</p><p>
The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute brings the resources of Yale University
to an entire school district in which 44 schools serve nearly 30,000 students.
More than 60 percent of the students come from families receiving public
assistance, and 85 percent are either African-American or Hispanic. There
are about 1,000 teachers eligible for participation in the Institute. During
its twenty-one years of existence, the Institute has offered 129 seminars
to 451 individual teachers, many of whom have participated for more than
one year. Thus far the teachers have created 1,171 curriculum units. Currently,
35 percent of New Haven high school teachers of subjects in the humanities
and sciences, 22 percent of transitional school teachers, 34 percent of middle
school teachers, and 15 percent of elementary school teachers have completed
successfully at least one year of the Institute. Over the years, a total
of 100 Yale faculty members, about half of whom are current or recently retired
members of the faculty, have participated in the Institute by giving talks
or leading one or more seminars. The founding Director of the Institute is
James R. Vivian.
</p><p>
For the duration of the Grant from the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund,
the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute will have a dual relationship to the
four other Teachers Institutes. It is both monitor of the Grant and a senior
colleague. It offers technical assistance to the other Teachers Institutes,
convenes the October Conferences, maintains the National Steering Committee
and the National Faculty Advisory Council, sponsors the national periodical
<i>On Common Ground</i>, and helps in other ways to further the aims of the
entire League of Teachers Institutes. At the same time, it encourages each
of the other Teachers Institutes to develop both a necessary independence
and a collaborative spirit. Its aim is to assist in transforming the group
of five Teachers Institutes into a fully collaborative league that might
in the future extend its membership to include Institutes at yet other sites.
</p><p>
In 1999, the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute offered seven seminars for
74 teachers: "Women's Voices in Fiction" (Laura M. Green, Assistant Professor
of English); "How Do You Know? The Experimental Basis for Chemical Knowledge"
(J. Michael McBride, Professor of Chemistry); "Art and Identity in Mexico,
from the Olmec to Modern Times" (Mary Miller, Vincent J. Scully Professor
of History of Art); "Immigration and American Life" (Rogers M. Smith, Alfred
Cowles Professor of Government); "Human-Environmental Relations" (John P.
Wargo, Associate Professor of Environmental Risk Analysis and Policy);
"Electronics in the 20th Century" (Robert G. Wheeler, Harold Hodgkinson Professor
Emeritus of Engineering and Applied Science); and "Detective Fiction: Its
Use as Literature and as History" (Robin W. Winks, Randolph W. Townsend,
Jr.,Professor of History). During the July Intensive Session it also offered
four National Seminars for teachers from the four sites in the National
Demonstration Project. The National Seminars included shortened versions
of "Art and Identity in Mexico, from the Olmec to Modern Times, " "Immigration
and American Life," and "Human-Environmental Relations," and a fourth seminar,
"Writing from Several Cultures" (Thomas R. Whitaker, Frederick W. Hilles
Professor Emeritus of English).
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#d">to the top of Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="e"><b>THE PITTSBURGH TEACHERS INSTITUTE</b></a>
</p><p>
The Pittsburgh Teachers Institute brings the resources of Chatham College
and Carnegie Mellon University to a selected portion of a school district
with 93 schools serving 41,000 students. Chatham brings to the collaboration
with the Pittsburgh Public Schools the strengths of a small liberal arts
college; Carnegie Mellon brings those of a university with a strong program
in the sciences. Both institutions have previously worked with the
schools-Carnegie Mellon, for example, sponsoring a program in the teaching
of science, and Chatham maintaining a program in teacher certification. This
is the first occasion, however, when the two institutions have collaborated
on a project in partnership with the schools.
</p><p>
This Teachers Institute will work with 20 elementary, middle, and high schools,
representing the three regions of the district, which have volunteered to
take part. Helen Faison, an experienced teacher and school administrator
and former chair of the Education Department at Chatham College, serves as
Director, with the assistance of Barbara Lazarus, Vice-Provost at Carnegie
Mellon, and Anne Steele, Vice-President at Chatham, who will help in the
relations between those two institutions. During Helen Faison's absence as
interim-Superintendent of Schools, John Groch, an Assistant Professor of
Communications at Chatham College, will serve as Acting Director.
</p><p>
In 1999, this Institute offered four seminars for 39 teachers: "Newspapers:
Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow" (James Davidson, Adjunct Professor of English,
Carnegie Mellon University); "American Culture in the 1950s" (John Groch,
Assistant Professor of Communication, Chatham College); "Physics, Energy
and Environmental Issues" (Richard Holman, Professor of Physics, Carnegie
Mellon University); and "Multicultural Literature: French African and Creole
Writers" (Janet Walker, Professor of French and Chair, Department of Modern
Languages, Chatham College).
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#e">to the top of Pittsburgh Teachers Institute</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="f"><b>THE HOUSTON TEACHERS INSTITUTE</b></a>
</p><p>
In the fourth largest city in the United States, the Houston Teachers Institute
brings the resources of the University of Houston to the Houston Independent
School District, whose 280 schools serve 212,000 students.  The University
of Houston is a state-supported research and teaching institution that draws
most of its students from the Greater Houston area.  The Houston Teachers
Institute builds upon the experience of the Common Ground project at the
University, directed first by James Pipkin and then by William Monroe, which
assisted high school teachers in expanding the canon of literary texts that
are taught in English classes. The late Michael Cooke, a Yale faculty member
and participant in the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, had served as an
advisor for that project.
</p><p>
The Houston Teachers Institute works with 20 self-selected middle and high
schools enrolling 31,300 students to establish a program that will address
the needs of an ethnically mixed student-body, a large proportion of whom
are non-English speaking. Paul Cooke, who has been a Visiting Assistant Professor
of Political Science, serves as Director.
</p><p>
In 1999, this Institute offered six seminars for 75 teachers: "Symmetry,
Patterns, and Designs" (Michael Field, Professor of Mathematics); "Hollywood
Distortions of History" (Garth Jowett, Professor of Communication); "The
United States in the 1960s" (Lawrence Curry, Assistant Professor of History
and Associate Dean); "Technology and the Discipline of Chemistry" (Simon
G. Bott, Research Associate Professor of Chemistry); "The History, Economic
Base, and Politics of Houston" (Richard Murray, Professor of Political Science);
and "Addressing Evil" (Cynthia A. Freeland, Professor of Philosophy).
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#f">to the top of Houston Teachers Institute</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="g"><b>THE ALBUQUERQUE TEACHERS INSTITUTE</b></a>
</p><p>
To a selected portion of a district that serves 85,800 students in 121 schools
and enrolls a high percentage of Hispanic students from low-income families,
the Albuquerque Teachers Institute brings the resources of the College of
Arts and Sciences at the University of New Mexico, the flagship state institution
of higher education. The University has long worked with the schools through
its College of Education and a variety of teacher training programs.
</p><p>
The Albuquerque Teachers Institute seeks to focus upon the high attrition
rate in the schools, and has therefore selected 21 middle and high schools
where that problem is most serious. It also seeks to establish the relevance
and interest of its program for both teachers and students by focusing on
topics that link the Southwest and contemporary issues. The Co-Directors
of the Albuquerque Teachers Institute are Wanda Martin, who has administered
the Freshman English courses at the University of New Mexico, and (for the
first seven months of 1999) Laura Cameron, who has administered the Freshman
Mathematics courses at the University. Douglas Earick, a teacher of science
in the Albuquerque Public Schools, has now succeeded Laura Cameron as
Co-Director.
</p><p>
In 1999, this Institute offered four seminars for 36 teachers: "Archeoastronomy"
(Michael Zeilik, Professor of Astronomy); "Environmental Impacts of Human
Settlement and Urbanization on the Albuquerque Region" (Leslie D. McFadden,
Professor of Earth and Planetary Sciences); "Architecture in the Southwest"
(Anne Taylor, Professor of Architecture); and "Political Culture in New Mexico"
(Phillip B. Gonzales, Associate Professor of Sociology).
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#g">to the top of Albuquerque Teachers Institute</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="h"><b>THE UCI-SANTA ANA TEACHERS INSTITUTE</b></a>
</p><p>
To Santa Ana, a city with nearly 50 schools serving 53,800 students, a majority
of whom have only a limited knowledge of English, the UCI-Santa Ana Teachers
Institute brings the resources of the nearby University of California at
Irvine. The University has long worked in a variety of ways with school systems
in several neighboring districts, in large part now through its Center for
Educational Partnerships.
</p><p>
The UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute focuses on a selected 26 elementary,
middle, and high schools, representing all four areas of the Santa Ana system.
There is here a special opportunity to show that Institute curriculum units
work well in a mainly Hispanic environment where the majority of students
have limited fluency in English. The Director of the UCI-Santa Ana Teachers
Institute is Barbara Kuhn Al-Bayati, who has been the Partnership Liaison
in the Center for Educational Partnerships at the University.
</p><p>
In 1999, this Institute offered six seminars for 52 teachers: "Myths and
Their Transformations" (Julia Lupton, Associate Professor of English and
Comparative Literature); "Discrete Mathematics and Computer Science" (Jean-Claude
Falmagne, Professor of Cognitive Sciences, and Stephen Franklin, Lecturer
in Information and Computer Science); "The (Re)presentation of History in
Film and Video: Narrative and Media" (Thelma Foote, Associate Professor of
History and Acting Director of African American Studies); "The Hardy Personality
in Theory, Research, and Practice" (Salvatore Maddi, Professor of Psychology
and Social Behavior); "Law and Morality" (John Dombrink, Professor of
Criminology, Law, and Society); and "Theorizing U.S. National Identity through
Multicultural Texts" (Lindon Barrett, Associate Professor of English and
Comparative Literature).
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#h">to the top of UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="i"><b>COMMUNICATION AND DISSEMINATION</b></a>
</p><p>
The League of Teachers Institutes will comprise a network of communication.
A range of technical assistance, which will include site visits, meetings
of the Directors, and advice on specific problems, will be provided to the
new Teachers Institutes by the Yale- New Haven Teachers Institute. Each year
those Teachers Institutes will provide reports, described in the section
on Documentation and Evaluation, to the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
There will also be lateral communication among the new Teachers Institutes
and common work to be accomplished by all five Institutes.
</p><p>
The National Steering Committee, which consists of a teacher from each Institute,
will take major initiative in planning this common work and encouraging
communication among teachers from the five sites. It will be complemented
by the National Faculty Advisory Council, which consists of a faculty member
from each Institute. There has been established an electronic Teachers Institute
Faculty Forum to facilitate communication among faculty members from the
five sites (tiff@yale.edu), and a similar forum is planned for the teachers.
The National Steering Committee and the National Faculty Advisory Council
will assist planning committees in arranging the October Conferences in 1999,
2000, and 2001. Those Conferences will provide opportunity for sharing of
accomplishments and challenges across the sites. If additional funding can
be obtained, the October Conference in 2001 and possibly another such Conference
in 2002 could become national in scope, bringing together representatives
from various sectors of the educational, funding, and policy-making communities.
Such National Conferences would be an important step in disseminating the
results of the National Demonstration Project and encouraging the establishment
of a second phase of Teachers Institutes in other cities.
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>National Teacher Steering Committee meeting with the Director and
members of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute Steering Committee in July
1999. (Clockwise from center rear: Mel E. Sanchez, Santa Ana; Peter N. Herndon,
Pedro Mendia, and Jean E. Sutherland, New Haven; Jennifer D. Murphy, Albuquerque;
Ninfa A. Sepólveda, Houston; Margaret McMackin, Pittsburgh; and James
R. Vivian.)</small></i>
</p><p>
The web site of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute already makes available
the publications of this Institute, including all of the curriculum units
that have been written. Comparable web sites are now being established by
other Institutes and will provide further links among them. A developing
electronic network will therefore link the Institutes more closely. If additional
funding can be obtained, the opportunity exists for the establishment of
a national web site dedicated to the National Demonstration Project as an
entity. Such a web site would be not only a communications hub for the work
of the Project but also an important continuing means of disseminating its
results to the nation. If other Teachers Institutes should be established,
this web site would be of even greater importance as a national center of
information on university-school partnerships.
</p><p>
The periodical <i>On Common Ground</i> is potentially an important means
of disseminating the results of the National Demonstration Project. Number
9, already planned for Winter 1999/2000, will contain articles by persons
from each of the sites on some aspect of the process of establishing a Teachers
Institute and meeting the needs of an urban school district. If funding can
be obtained for two numbers in each of the three years of the National
Demonstration Project, <i>On Common Ground</i> will be able to provide a
detailed account for a national readership of the opportunities seized, the
obstacles encountered and overcome, and the major accomplishments of the
four new Teachers Institutes. Such an account would be invaluable in the
attempt further to expand this League of Teachers Institutes.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#i">to the top of Communication and Dissemination</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="j"><b>DOCUMENTATION AND EVALUATION</b></a>
</p><p>
<a name="k"><b>Internal Documentation and Evaluation</b></a>
</p><p>
Each of the new Teachers Institutes will submit to the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute interim financial reports, and annual narrative and financial reports.
The Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute will submit to the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's
Digest Fund both annual and final narrative and financial reports that will
synthesize and assess the information provided by the sites.
</p><p>
These reports will describe the scope, strategy, demonstration goals, and
progress of the new Teachers Institutes. They will include evidence that
the new Institutes remain in accord with the basic principles of the Teachers
Institute approach. They will describe the curriculum units developed, the
relationship between participating school teachers and university faculty,
the nature and extent of leadership exerted by teacher-participants, the
incentives for university faculty members and school teachers to participate,
and the assistance from the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute that was needed,
obtained, and used. They will include an analysis of the participation of
school teachers in Institute activities, using surveys and other instruments
developed by the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute and modified as needed
to make possible comparisons across the five partnerships. They will analyze
the factors contributing to, and hindering, the success of the new Institutes,
and the effects of those Institutes upon teacher empowerment, curricular
change, and other issues central to school reform. They will also give an
account of the progress made toward funding the new Institutes beyond the
period of this Grant. At least once during the Grant period, annual reports
will also include surveys of the use of curriculum units by Fellows and
non-Fellows in the school systems. The final report from the Yale-New Haven
Teachers Institute will summarize the three-year demonstration, make clear
the most important outcomes, impacts, and lessons learned, describe how the
demonstration has changed and how we may address the issues it has posed,
and indicate the plans at each site for continuing the partnership.
</p>
<p>
<a name="l"><b>External Evaluation</b></a>
</p><p>
The DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund has contracted with Policy Studies
Associates, a research and social policy firm based in Washington, D.C.,
to evaluate the National Demonstration Project. The evaluation will examine
the implementation of Teachers Institutes at universities and their partner
schools participating in the project from 1999-2002.
</p><p>
The Fund is supporting the National Demonstration Project and its evaluation
to accomplish two goals: to contribute to the professional development of
teachers by supporting partnerships between universities and public school
systems that draw upon the experiences of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute;
and to gather information that will enable others to decide whether to build
similar partnerships using their own resources. The Fund-commissioned evaluation
will provide universities and public school systems throughout the nation
with answers to the questions that they are likely to have about the utility
of the National Demonstration Project as a source of ideas that they could
use to create Teachers Institutes in their communities.
</p><p>
Over the course of their work, researchers will focus on examining and
documenting the following:
</p>
<ul>
<li>
The experiences and perceptions of teachers who participate in the Institutes,
as well as school administrators who interact with the Institute;
</li><li>
The recruitment process for participating teachers;
</li><li>
The educational partnerships between the university sites and their partner
schools and districts;
</li><li>
The benefits that teachers gain from participating in the Institutes;
</li><li>
The cost of establishing a Teachers Institute;
</li><li>
Additional information to assist other interested universities and school
systems in establishing their own Teachers Institutes.
</li></ul>
<center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#j">to the top of Documentation and Evaluation</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="m"><b>DESIRED OUTCOMES</b></a>
</p><p>
If successful, the National Demonstration Project will show that it is feasible
to adapt the approach of the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute to the pattern
and magnitude of needs and resources at other sites where school systems
serve students from low-income communities. It will show that, without varying
from the basic principles of the Institute approach, a range of appropriate
scopes and strategies can be devised that will help to meet the distinctive
needs of cities much larger than New Haven. It will show the possibility
of sustainable Teachers Institutes in a variety of institutional contexts,
with the participation of liberal arts colleges, private universities, and
state universities, acting individually or in a consortium. And it will show
how institutions that have long had departments or schools of Education may
now devote some of their energy to providing seminars for teachers in the
liberal arts and sciences.
</p><p>
The National Demonstration Project has already established a League of Teachers
Institutes from coast to coast, which now serves its members as an agency
for collaborative activities and mutual support, and which can also serve
as the organizational basis for the establishment of yet other Teachers
Institutes. Within such Institutes the teachers are finding a greater creative
responsibility for their own curricula, and they are finding an opportunity
to exercise leadership and judgment in sustaining the program of seminars
that provides a continuing professional development. Within such Institutes
the university faculty members are also recognizing more fully their
responsibility for teaching at all levels in their own communities. As this
occurs, both school teachers and university faculty members are discovering
their true collegiality in the ongoing process of learning and teaching.
And they are realizing both the opportunities and the responsibilities that
follow from their membership in a larger community devoted to the educational
welfare of the young people of this nation.
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>University faculty members from all five Institutes meeting in
New Haven, July 1999. (Clockwise from front left: Rev. Frederick J. Streets,
New Haven; Guadelupe San Miguel and Lawrence Curry, Houston; Elizabeth Roark,
Pittsburgh; Felipe Gonzales, Albuquerque; Sabatino Sofia, New Haven; Colston
Chandler, Albuquerque; Traugott Lawler, New Haven; William Monroe, Houston;
and Stephen Franklin, Irvine.)</small></i>
</p><p>
If successful, the National Demonstration Project will not only have established
four new Teachers Institutes that sustain themselves after the conclusion
of the Grant from the DeWitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund, it will also have
made clear the importance and the viability of the principles upon which
these Institutes are based. It will have shown that these principles can
contribute to the most important kind of school reform-the improvement of
teaching itself. And it will have provided the foundation for the expansion
of some Teachers Institutes and the establishment of yet other Teachers
Institutes in cities across the nation.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#m">to the top of Desired Outcomes</a> | <a href="#top">to
the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="n"><b>EXPANSION AND AFFILIATION</b></a>
</p><p>
The expansion of existing Teachers Institutes in large cities may occur through
a step-by-step process of scaling up, as more school teachers and university
faculty become interested in participating, and as increased funding allows
the offering of more seminars. A Teachers Institute may begin in this way
to expand its scope of operation within a city. When the resources of a single
institution of higher education are not adequate to meet the needs of a large
school district, it may prove desirable to expand the partnership. There
seems a possibility, for example, of expanding the partnership between Chatham
College and Carnegie Mellon University to include other institutions in
Pittsburgh. It also may be possible at some point for the Houston Teachers
Institute to draw upon faculty from other institutions of higher education
in Houston. But there are also opportunities for other kinds of expansion
within a given scope. Teachers Institutes may wish to establish Centers for
Professional and Curricular Development in the schools, as has been done
in New Haven, which may bring to a larger number of classroom teachers the
work of Fellows in the Institute. Through such Centers they may wish to establish
Academies in summer or after school, as has also been done in New Haven,
in which teachers may collaboratively shape a curriculum for selected students
on the basis of their work in the Institute.
</p><p>
There are also different ways in which new Teachers Institutes might be
established at other sites. Additional funding on a national level could
enable, in one or more phases, the expansion of the existing League of Teachers
Institutes. This process would make it possible for the new Institutes to
receive technical assistance and collaborative support from those already
established. Additional funding on a local level might enable the establishment
of a new Teachers Institute that would be free-standing but would have the
opportunity to affiliate itself with the existing League. By either route
or both at once, a larger number of urban school districts and institutions
of higher education might join together to form a network of Teachers Institutes
that could become a major force in the reform and revitalizing of teaching
and learning in this country.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#n">to the top of Expansion and Affiliation</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="o"><b>APPENDIX: BASIC PRINCIPLES</b></a>
</p><p>
The following principles, fundamental to the approach that has been developed
by the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, are quoted with slight condensation
from the Request for Proposals for Implementation Grants. They are included
here because they are the guiding principles for each of the four new Teachers
Institutes. Although listed as separate principles, they are interrelated
elements of an organically unified approach.
</p><p>
1) The new Institute links an institution or institutions of higher education
to a school district (or districts) in which a significant proportion of
the students come from low-income communities. It offers a distinctive plan
for an adaptation of the Institute's approach, addressing an educational
problem that may be appropriately addressed by that approach. The size, scope,
and emphasis of the adaptation depend upon the needs of the district(s),
the educational resources available, and the expected funding.
</p><p>
2) A continuing, full-time director (or, if approved, two half-time directors)
provided by the Institute serves as convenor, administrator, liaison between
the district(s) and the administration and faculty of the institution(s)
of higher education, and fund-raiser. The director reports to the chief officers
of the institution(s) and the district(s), and is able to recruit faculty
from various parts of the institution(s) of higher education.
</p><p>
3) The Institute is led in crucial respects by teachers in the district(s),
who play a major and indispensable role in the planning, organization, conduct,
and evaluation of the programs intended to benefit them and, through them,
their students. They are involved in initiating and approving decisions with
respect to seminars offered, within the scope determined as feasible and
appropriate by university and school district administrators and the director.
The seminars are special offerings designed to address the Fellows' interests
and needs for further preparation and curriculum development. The Fellows
are not students in university courses. Rather, they are considered full
members of the university community during the year in which they are taking
a seminar.
</p><p>
4) There is a pool of teachers in the schools prepared to play a leading
role in planning, organizing, sustaining, and evaluating the new Institute.
They are responsible for recruiting other teachers into the program. There
is also a pool of faculty members from the liberal arts and/or sciences in
the institution(s) of higher education who teach at the undergraduate and/or
graduate levels and who are prepared to lead seminars, advise in the shaping
of curriculum, and endorse the curriculum offered by the Institute. If faculty
members from departments, schools, or colleges of Education are involved
in the Institute's program, they should indicate their readiness to lead
seminars that focus primarily upon "content" rather than "pedagogy." All
teacher-leaders and university faculty members should understand the distinctive
nature of such collaborative work and should be eager and willing to participate
in it.
</p><p>
5) Policies within the school district(s) pertaining to curriculum and
professional development (as established by the state, the school board,
the union, or specific administrators) must be conducive to the development
of the Institute, or at least not incompatible with it.
</p><p>
6) The curriculum will consist of intensive long-term seminars in several
disciplines on broadly defined topics (meeting over a period of months) in
which the seminar leader and the Fellows will study and discuss certain common
texts, objects, or places and each Fellow will prepare a substantial "curriculum
unit" that he or she intends to employ in the classroom during the following
year. This curriculum unit will consist of an essay on the material to be
presented in the classroom and the pedagogical strategies to be employed,
followed by several lesson plans, which are examples of those to be used
by the teacher, and an annotated bibliography. The curriculum units may bear
a variety of relationships to the general topic of the seminar, appropriate
to the grade-level and the aims of the teacher. They will have immediate
application in the classroom, and they will be consistent with the curricular
guidelines provided by district or school that are to be followed by the
teacher.
</p><p>
7) Participating teachers from the institution(s) of higher education and
the schools are considered professional colleagues working within a collegial
relationship. Seminar leaders and Fellows understand that all participants
bring to the seminar important strengths, both experience and knowledge,
with respect to the seminar topic and/or its potential relevance to the
classroom.
</p><p>
8) Although the seminar leaders are primarily responsible for presenting
to the seminar the "content" or "knowledge" of one or more disciplines, the
seminar itself will at appropriate points involve consideration both of that
content of the procedures necessary to present it in the classroom. That
consideration, to which the Fellows will bring their own experience, is important
in establishing the collegiality in the seminar.
</p><p>
9) To strengthen teaching and learning throughout the schools, the new Institute
must involve a significant proportion of all teachers within its designated
scope and must therefore actively recruit teachers who have not participated
before. The Institute must have a rationale for the designated scope and
make clear how it will involve a significant proportion of the teachers within
that scope.
</p><p>
10) Within its designated scope, the Institute encourages any teacher to
apply who has a teaching assignment relevant to a seminar topic, can present
a proposal for a curriculum unit relevant to that topic, and will be assigned
to teach a course in which that unit can be used. It makes every effort to
ensure that the pool of teachers applying to the Institute represents a
cross-section of all eligible teachers. Its program should attract teachers
regardless of age, ethnicity, gender, academic background, professional
experience, and length of time in teaching.
</p><p>
11) In order to recognize the intensive, demanding, and professionally
significant nature of their participation in the seminars, the seminar leaders
will be provided with some remuneration, and the Fellows, who participate
on a voluntary basis, will be provided with some appropriate honorarium and/or
stipend. This honorarium or stipend for participating school teachers is
not salary or wages and is therefore not to be viewed as subject to any
conditions of employment.
</p><p>
12) The institutional and district administrations are committed to a continuing
collaboration with each other during the Grant period on the basis of this
plan and also to its extension beyond the Grant period.
</p><p>
13) There will be ongoing financial support from both the institution(s)
of higher education and the school district(s). They are committed to provide
or seek necessary supplementary funding for the duration of the Grant, and
have plans to seek entire funding thereafter.
</p><p>
14) Because each new Institute is a "demonstration site," making clear the
advantages and difficulties of adapting the Institute approach to another
situation, there will be an explicit and visible relation between the new
Institutes and the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
</p><p>
15) Each new Institute is committed to communicating with the Yale-New Haven
Teachers Institute and with the other new Institutes, and to disseminating
their experience of the adaptation in various ways to other potential and
actual Institutes across the nation. The means of communication may include
personal visits, e-mail, news groups, online chats, text-based forums, etc.,
and will also include written accounts by the new Institutes for publication
in <i>On Common Ground</i>.
</p><p>
16) The new Institutes are committed to undertaking at their own cost, in
cooperation with the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute, an annual review
of the progress of the project. They assume responsibility for their continuing
self-evaluation, in cooperation with the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
They will provide the staff, the Implementation Team of New Haven colleagues,
and other documenters that may be sent by that Institute and by the DeWitt
Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund with full access to their activities and their
documentation, including school and university personnel and sites. Each
new Institute should anticipate the possibility that significant failure
to reach stated goals of the demonstration, or to maintain it in accordance
with the conditions agreed upon, could result in the termination of the funding.
Each new Institute will submit annual reports to the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute that provide:
</p>
<ul>
<li>
a systematic description of the new Institute and its activities, including
ways that it has adapted the New Haven approach, the process by which it
was established, how that process has unfolded over time, and the progress
made toward the goals of the demonstration;
</li><li>
evidence that the new Institute is faithful to each of the basic principles
of the New Haven approach;
</li><li>
indication of the incentives at the new Institute for university faculty
members and school teachers to participate;
</li><li>
the cost of operating the Institute, set forth in detail as specified in
the financial reporting requirements; a documentation of other funds allocated
to the Institute; and the availability of long-term funding sources;
</li><li>
an analysis of data on the participation of teachers in Institute activities;
</li><li>
a summary description of the curriculum units developed by participating
teachers, with information about the teachers' use of the Units and any other
outcomes of their participation;
</li><li>
an account of the assistance from the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute that
was needed, obtained, and used;
</li><li>
a description of the relationship between participating teachers and university
faculty;
</li><li>
an analysis of the factors contributing to, and hindering, the success of
the new Institute;
</li><li>
and an analysis of the effects of the new Institute upon teacher empowerment,
curricular change, and other issues central to school reform.
</li></ul>
<p>
Using surveys and other instruments developed by the Yale-New Haven Teachers
Institute, each new Institute will document: the number of teachers who apply;
the representativeness of those teachers vis-à-vis the entire pool
of teachers eligible to participate; teachers' and faculty members' assessments
of the new Institute; and the classroom use to which teachers put the curriculum
units. The new Institutes will work with the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute
to make whatever changes in the instruments may be needed to adapt them so
that the results will be comparable across the different demonstration sites.
</p><center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#o">to the top of Appendix: Basic Principles</a> | <a href="#top">to the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
<hr/>
<p>
<a name="p"><b>CONTACT INFORMATION</b></a>
</p>
<p>
<b>Pittsburgh Teachers Institute</b>
</p><p>
Director:             Helen Faison (January-June
1999)<br/>
Acting Director:  John Groch (July-December 1999)
</p><p>
address:             Pittsburgh Teachers
Institute<br/>
Chatham College<br/>
Woodland Road<br/>
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15232
</p><p>
phone:               (412) 365-1184<br/>
fax:                    (412)
365-1505
</p><p>
email:                 groch@chatham.edu
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>Pittsburgh Teachers Institute team meeting in New Haven, July 1999.
(Clockwise from left: Verna Arnold, Carol M. Petett, Patricia Y. Gordon,
Margaret McMackin, Helen Faison, James Davidson, Elizabeth Roark, and John
Groch.)</small></i>
</p>
<p>
<b>Houston Teachers Institute</b>
</p><p>
Director:             Paul Cooke
</p><p>
address:              Houston Teachers
Institute<br/>
c/o Department of Political Science<br/>
University of Houston<br/>
Houston, Texas 77204-3474<br/>
<br/>
phone:               (713) 743-3986<br/>
fax:                    (713)
743-3927
</p><p>
email:                
pcooke@bayou.uh.edu
</p><p>
web site:            http://www.uh.edu/hti/
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>Houston Teachers Institute team members in New Haven, July 1999.
(From left: Front row: Daniel Addis, Jurrell Gilliam, William J. Pisciella,
Paul Cooke, and Ninfa A. Sepúlveda. Second row: Joy Teague and Natalie
Martinez.)</small></i>
</p>
<p>
<b>Albuquerque Teachers Institute</b>
</p><p>
Co-directors:   Wanda Martin<br/>
Laura Cameron (January-June 1999)<br/>
Douglas Earick (July-December 1999)
</p><p>
address:           Albuquerque Teachers Institute<br/>
2045 Mesa Vista Hall<br/>
University of New Mexico<br/>
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131
</p><p>
phone:            (505) 277-2794<br/>
fax:                 (505) 277-2796
</p><p>
email:             wmartin@unm.edu<br/>
earick@aps.edu<br/>
abqteach@unm.edu
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>Albuquerque Teachers Institute team meeting in New Haven, July
1999. (Clockwise from left: Lorraine B. Martinez, Les McFadden, Colston Chandler,
Jennifer D. Murphy, Felipe Gonzales, Tom R. Mace, Douglas Earick, Wanda Martin,
Susan Leonard, and Aaron Chávez.)</small></i>
</p>
<p>
<b>UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute</b>
</p><p>
Director:        Barbara Kuhn Al-Bayati
</p><p>
address:         UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute<br/>
Center for Educational Partnerships<br/>
Room
600<br/>
Administration Building<br/>
University of California, Irvine<br/>
Irvine, California 92697-2500
</p><p>
phone:           (949) 824-4145 <br/>
fax:                (949) 824-3599
</p><p>
email:             bkalbaya@uci.edu
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>UCI-Santa Ana Teachers Institute team meeting with New Haven
representatives, July 1999. (Clockwise from left: Elizabeth A. Enloe, Heidi
R. Cooley, Timeri K. Tolnay, Tyra H. Demateis, Barbara Kuhn Al-Bayati, Thomas
R. Whitaker of New Haven, Stephen Franklin, Mel E. Sanchez, James R. Vivian
and Patricia Lydon of New Haven, Thelma W. Foote, and Sharon W.
Saxton.)</small></i>
</p>
<p>
<b>Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute</b>
</p><p>
Director:        James R. Vivian
</p><p>
address:        Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute<br/>
53
Wall Street<br/>
P.O.
Box 203563<br/>
New
Haven, CT 06520-3563
</p><p>
phone:           (203) 432-1080<br/>
fax:                (203) 432-1084
</p><p>
email:             teachers@yale.edu
</p><p>
web site:        /
</p><p>
<i>(picture available in print form)</i>
</p><p>
<i><small>Meeting of the Implementation Team of New Haven colleagues, July
1999. (Clockwise from front left: Sabatino Sofia, Mary E. Miller, Jules D.
Prown, Mary Stewart, Sheldon A. Ayers, Peter N. Herndon, Jean E. Sutherland,
Rogers M. Smith, Liaison Patricia Lydon, Joseph Montagna, Thomas R. Whitaker,
Assistant Director Annette R. Streets, and James R. Vivian.)</small></i>
</p>
<center>
<div align="right">
<a href="#p">to the top of Contact Information</a> | <a href="#top">to
the top of A National Demonstration Project</a>
</div>
</center>
© 1999 by the Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute.
</main>