---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 82.03.04"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1982/3/82.03.04.x.html"
unitTitle: "An Analysis of the Civil Rights Act of 1964: A Legislated Response to Racial Discrimination in the U.S."
unitAuthor: "Henry A. Rhodes"
keywords: "Civil Rights Act 1964 American Afro-American History Prejudice"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 7th and 8th grades U.S. Civics and 9-12 grades U.S. History"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 82.03.04:
</h4>
This unit deals with the origin and content of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.  It examines the contributions made by the Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations to this civil rights legislation.  The effect that the civil rights demonstrations of the early 1960’s had on this civil rights bill is also analyzed.  This unit also examines the effect that the C.R.A. of 1964 had on American society.  One special feature of this curriculum unit is a taped interview with Burke Marshall who is the former Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department during the enactment of the C.R.A. of 1964.  When the students finish this unit they should be able to explain or describe the following:
<p>
1.  The position and contributions of the Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson administrations towards civil rights for the American Negro and the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
</p>
<p>
2.  The need for the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
</p>
<p>
3.  The effect of the Civil Rights Movement and its leaders on the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
</p>
<p>
4.  The major contributions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to American society with respect to equality.
</p>
<p>
5.  The ten Titles which compose the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for 7th and 8th grades U.S. Civics and 9-12 grades U.S. History)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Civil Rights Act 1964 American Afro-American History Prejudice
</i>
</p>
</body>