---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 83.02.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1983/2/83.02.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Mythological Archetypes: Amazons to Madison Avenue"
unitAuthor: "John Severi"
keywords: "Ancient Greek Mythology Personal Growth Teaching Psychology"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for grades 10 through 12 College English and Honors English"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 83.02.07:
</h4>
This unit introduces students to mythology through a wide range of methods involving discussion, oral reading, writing assignments, projects, small group exercises, and vocabulary study.  Students will be introduced to the Greek gods and goddesses, heroes and heroines, the concepts of matriarchy and patriarchy, and a structured discussion technique.  Students will also make coats of arms, shields, collages, and create a class mythology in the form of a comic strip-style narrative.  Divine and heroic qualities will be examined along with the anti-female aspects of mythology and modern society.
<p>
The unit was written to be used with a high school level honors English class.  These students will be using the “Man the Myth Maker” text and Edith Hamilton’s “Mythology.”  These will be supplemented with selections from Homer’s “Iliad” and “Odyssey,” Ovid’s “Metamorphoses,” and Hesiod’s “Theogony.”  The bibliography is divided into three sections.  The first section lists books read for and in reference to the Greek and Roman Mythology seminar in which I was a participant.  The second section contains books by feminist writers on various aspects of women in mythology and the existence of an ancient matriarchy prior to the patriarchy established in Bronze Age Greece. The third section lists books related to mythology which can be found in the Hillhouse High School library.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for grades 10 through 12 College English and Honors English)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Ancient Greek Mythology Personal Growth Teaching Psychology
</i>
</p>
</body>