---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 83.02.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1983/2/83.02.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Mythology in the Esl Classroom"
unitAuthor: "Doris Vazquez"
keywords: "Greek Mythology Reading Instruction"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for grades 9 through 12 Greek and Roman History and English classes"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 83.02.09:
</h4>
This unit’s main purpose is to serve as a handbook for teachers in incorporating classical myths into the ESL curriculum.  This unit will deal with the mythological or possible origins of the names of the months from January to June; the days of the week; a retelling of the Creation according to the Greeks; and descriptions of many of the gods which in one way or another are related to the origin of the month or day being studied.  All of this will be organized in six lesson plans, one for each month.  The information will be presented in a month by month study.  Under the heading of January, for example, several topics will be presented.  The teacher is free to use all the material or just part of it.  Vocabulary lists will be found at the end of each selection.  This vocabulary is to be studied in context and later used in sentences or in summarizing the information.  Artwork by the students and by great artists should be an important part of the study of mythology.  The unit is to be introduced to the students in January.  This will allow time for developing a working vocabulary and sentence patterns in the beginning levels of ESL.
<p>
(Recommended for grades 9 through 12 Greek and Roman History and English classes)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Greek Mythology Reading Instruction
</i>
</p>
</body>