---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 96.01.14"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1996/1/96.01.14.x.html"
unitTitle: "Why Do We Have To Suffer From The Rights of Others"
unitAuthor: "Carolyn C. Smith"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies, Reading, and Social Skills Development, grades K-8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 96.01.14:
</h4>
Through the years certain ethnic groups have been stigmatized to be low achievers, trouble makers, and other negative titles which promote failure in society. Recently the subject of racism has hit the surface like a ton of bricks. Regardless of to how the victims feel because of the action, there is always a legitimate reason as to why the person said or did what he did. It appears that society has a bag of excuses for every given statement or action. The minority group is usually on the receiving end of racial remarks, thus making matters worse for them.  This unit will address strategies which will explore the attitudes and behaviors that students can use in a positive manner when they are the direct victim of racial remarks and situations. The students will be able to (1) identify and give examples of the meanings of racism and discrimination, (2) know how to use appropriate behavior in and our of the school environment, (3) know what economic, social, political, and personal factors to use to reduce conflicts with racism, and (4) identify barriers which are associated with children at risk and what they can do to reduce and/or eliminate these barriers.
<p>
The unit is designed to integrate all subject areas of the K-8 curricula which can be used in full or in parts as a supplement for academic instruction as the teacher sees fit for a particular grade level as well as special disciplines such as art, music, and physical education.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Social Studies, Reading, and Social Skills Development, grades K-8)
</p>
</body>