---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 00.02.01"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2000/2/00.02.01.x.html"
unitTitle: "Rehabilitation and Control of Juvenile Delinquency Offenders"
unitAuthor: "Afolabi James Adebayo"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for grades 7-12."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 00.02.01:
</h4>
1. Students should be able to understand the process of juvenile rehabilitation.
<p>
2. This unit examines the process of rehabilitation and control of juvenile offenders, and also the process it takes to rehabilitate the juvenile offenders including all the players that are involved. The unit will cover the outline listed below. During the process, the students will be the major players in the discussion of juvenile offenders rehabilitation program.
</p>
<p>
3. The long time solution to the problem of juvenile crime falls largely outside of the law enforcement system. It requires strengthening those basic institutions- the family, schools, religious institutions, and community groups-that are responsible for instilling values and creating law-abiding citizens.
</p>
<p>
4. With respect to the first, large group of juvenile offenders, the juvenile system must be better designed to deter them from committing additional crimes. The goal of this unit is to prevent juveniles in this group from becoming chronic offenders.
</p>
<p>
5. Although, this unit will also address the issue of excessive lenience can result in additional transgressions, culminating in a life of crime. This unit will send a message to the juvenile that crime does not pay.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for grades 7-12.)
</p>
</body>