---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1996/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.01.x.html">96.01.01</a> <br/> This unit focuses on the effects of Jim Crow laws on the human spirit. The unit is literature-based and emphasizes decision making and self-awareness. Lessons include a Mock Segregation role play, a Langston Hughes poetry lesson, and “Why is Dr. King a Hero?” <p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.02.x.html">96.01.02</a> <br/> This multifaceted unit exposes us to life in the U.S. during the twentieth century, from Jim Crow to Japanese Relocation Centers in World War II. Themes include the Harlem Renaissance, The Great Migration, and how these events were expressed through literature and art. Racial injustice is the overriding theme. Lessons challenge students to treat historical issues from an artist’s perspective. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.03.x.html">96.01.03</a> <br/> Using African folk tales and Mayan myths, the author intends to teach students not only about cultural variations, but also about history, geography and art, with a literature base. Includes ten full days of lesson plans, culminating in a week-long myth-writing exercise. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.04.x.html">96.01.04</a> <br/> The unit’s emphasis is on civil rights and civil liberties during the period 1954 through the Civil Rights Act of 1964, along with a brief section dealing with the Chicano demands in the 1960s. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.05.x.html">96.01.05</a> <br/> “Can citizens have equality under the law and their language too?” The unit compares racial and language differences with the ultimate purpose of appreciating the cultures that exist within New Haven, especially the Hispanic and French. Contains 15 creative activities for students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.06.x.html">96.01.06</a> <br/> This unit discusses the pros and cons of schooling children who are segregated by race and/or gender. What are the legal implications for federal funding under the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment? The author cites several modern cases along with (Prudence) Crandall v. Connecticut in the 1830's. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.07.x.html">96.01.07</a> <br/> The unit encourages students to stand up against racism and violence by studying role model civil rights activists such as Rosa Parks, Stokely Carmichael, Medgar Evers and others. Other sections of the unit are entitled “Children as Heroes” and “Take a Stand,” and culminates with a “March on New Haven.” </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.08.x.html">96.01.08</a> <br/> This unit investigates the role of culture and law, particularly cases where cultural/religious practices come into direct conflict with the U.S. legal system. Role-plays, town meetings and mock trials engage students in realistic conflicts which are difficult to resolve. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.09.x.html">96.01.09</a> <br/> By examining two famous cases in which race played a significant factor, students are encouraged to face themselves in light of the divisions in our society along racial lines. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.10.x.html">96.01.10</a> <br/> A hard look at the criminal justice system, this unit is intended to encourage an activist response to injustice by confronting the “inherent racist” nature of our society. </p>
<p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.11.x.html">96.01.11</a> <br/> This unit focuses on perceptions that society in general and Connecticut’s courts in particular are unfair to minorities. Activities include script writing and a class multicultural song-book. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.12.x.html">96.01.12</a> <br/> This unit begins with case summaries that have challenged the “color blind” standards of the U.S. law and asks the question: “How far can affirmative action programs go without becoming reverse discrimination?” </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.13.x.html">96.01.13</a> <br/> How did affirmative action come into being? Why was it created? Is it still needed today? The author refers to Supreme Court cases, legislative history and variety of experts’ views on the subject. Are “set-aside” contracts a legitimate way to assure minority business people a chance of competing? These and other questions hope to provoke students to come to their own conclusions. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.14.x.html">96.01.14</a> <br/> Is the so-called “American Dream” within the grasp of African Americans and other minorities? Issues of hiring, housing and education are placed in the context of past and present intolerant attitudes. Students are exposed to positive values and conflict resolution techniques to help them direct their feelings in appropriate ways. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/1/96.01.15.x.html">96.01.15</a> <br/> This unit teaches students to balance rights with responsibilities and that respect for human differences is important. Topics such as multiculturalism, stereotypes and fairness are defined and discussed. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/2/96.02.01.x.html">96.02.01</a> <br/> This unit explores how many minority families are forced to live in environmental areas hazardous to their health. How much of their plight is by design? The authors offer guidelines for environmental activism to achieve environmental justice for people of color. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/2/96.02.07.x.html">96.02.07</a> <br/> This unit focuses on the need to be aware of the history of the textile industry, the people who worked there, and the unhealthy atmosphere in which they often worked. How is cotton cloth made and dyed? What laws help to insure the health of the workers today? Can we identify industries where workers continue to be exploited? These are major questions that will challenge students to action. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.01.x.html">96.03.01</a> <br/> With a classroom puppet, Willie Sunday, leading the way, this unit uses two films, Pocahontas and Little Red Riding Hood, to help young children approach film and literature with a critical eye. A more accurate picture of Pocahontas, Native Americans in general, and the nature of wolves is sought through a variety of pupil involving activities. Drama is stressed and the unit is part of a school team. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.02.x.html">96.03.02</a> <br/> Centered around the Disney film, Song of the South, this unit uses the Uncle Remus figure to develop a more accurate picture of slavery and the historical importance and purposes of storytelling during this period. It employs a variety of reading strategies that may be related to both film and literature. The unit is part of a school team. </p><p> <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.03.x.html">96.03.03</a> <br/> Using a variety of popular children’s films, this unit aims to develop a more thoughtful approach toward defining beauty, as opposed to the stereotypes often presented in film. Activities employ use of multicultural literature to reinforce the unit’s basic theme. Unit is part of a team. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.04.x.html">96.03.04</a> <br/> Using film as a springboard, this unit attempts to present a more accurate picture of HIV and AIDS. Activities aim to dispel many of the stereotypes held regarding the disease and its victims. This unit is part of a larger school team. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.05.x.html">96.03.05</a> <br/> Through the use of film and television, this unit attempts to help students to first understand stereotyping and then to be able to recognize it in film and T.V. as a force that can have far-reaching damaging effects. Activities and discussions are often thought-provoking. Unit is part of a school team. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.06.x.html">96.03.06</a> <br/> Through the use of three films about Pocahontas, this unit attempts to develop a more accurate picture of both English and Powhatan life. It contains helpful background information. Activities include creating a Powhatan village and developing television interviews of historical characters for video taping. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.07.x.html">96.03.07</a> <br/> By examining Hollywood’s treatment of the slavery era, this unit will help students examine the dehumanized and marginalized stereotyped African American characters with a critical, informed eye. Activities use positive, more accurate films, literature and story telling to counteract negative depiction and develop a positive self and group image. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.08.x.html">96.03.08</a> <br/> By using films concerned with diversity and culture, this unit attempts to enhance student awareness of various cultures. Activities focus on writing, especially poetry, but integrate well with other areas of the curriculum. Groups examined include a wide array of cultures; the barnyard prejudices in Babe, turmoil in South Africa, antisemitism in occupied Poland, and others. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.09.x.html">96.03.09</a> <br/> By focusing on African and Latin women artists, this unit attempts to compare and contrast their styles and message. It includes helpful background information and a variety of hands-on activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.10.x.html">96.03.10</a> <br/> This unit uses a variety of media and approaches, including visual art, literature, video, writing, and discussion, to help students develop a deepening awareness of identity and stereotype. Contains many interrelated hands-on activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.11.x.html">96.03.11</a> <br/> Through the use of selected films, pupils will examine how minorities, ethnic groups, and history are portrayed in this media with the goal of allowing them to gain a greater understanding of these groups. Thought provoking lessons. Encourages use of INTERNET. </p>
<p> <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.12.x.html">96.03.12</a> <br/> Through showing two fictional and two non-fictional films about African American students’ experience in college, this unit aims to encourage pupils, especially marginal students, to visualize themselves attending college. Thought provoking discussion questions are provided for each film. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.13.x.html">96.03.13</a> <br/> Designed for acting students, this unit uses film and written material to study the contributions of black actors to American Cinema from the silent era to the present. Activities allow pupils to interpret and perform a number of roles. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/3/96.03.14.x.html">96.03.14</a> <br/> Through examining the contributions of African American film makers Oscar Micheaux and Matty Riech within the political, social, and historical context in which they worked, this unit will allow students to develop a deeper appreciation of the obstacles these men faced while at the same time increasing the student’s knowledge of African American history. Script writing and presentation activities should easily involve students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.01.x.html">96.04.01</a> <br/> The historical-cultural approach of this unit challenges students to think about the issues of migration to the U.S. from the point of view of Mexicans and Puerto Ricans. Are undocumented (illegal) immigrants entitled to any privileges in our country? What is the best way to teach English to Spanish-speaking students? Uses considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.02.x.html">96.04.02</a> <br/> Using imaginary interviews, the author of this unit introduces her music students to the cultures of four Caribbean nations. Why did these people leave their homelands? What makes their culture so special to them? How have they had to adapt to a new way of life? The unit proposes that pluralism and ethnicity are assets and suggests ways to emphasize this in the classrooms. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.03.x.html">96.04.03</a> <br/> This unit is intended for students in Spanish language, but discusses historical and cultural issues of Caribbean people which makes it appropriate in social studies classes as well. The author uses the historical record, music, literature and personal narrative to engage students in a multicultural journey. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.04.x.html">96.04.04</a> <br/> The unit traces a Puerto Rican family’s efforts to acquire a piece of the American Dream, from the novel “Family Installments” by Edwin Rivera; an effective way of introducing elements of the island culture to students. Excellent lesson plans with varied practical classroom instructional techniques. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.05.x.html">96.04.05</a> <br/> After tracing the historical changes in the Philippines which have influenced immigration to the U.S., this unit introduces the student to the diversity of Filipinos in this country. Contains helpful background information and case studies. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.06.x.html">96.04.06</a> <br/> Using an interdisciplinary approach, this unit explores the opportunities and challenges encountered in the immigrant experience. Contains many pupil engaging activities. </p>
<p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.07.x.html">96.04.07</a> <br/> With emphasis on reading and language arts connections, this unit is designed to help children understand the history, challenges and contributions of immigrants to the United States. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.08.x.html">96.04.08</a> <br/> Focusing on the last fifty years of immigration and its future, this unit examines the factors which motivate the immigrant’s movement to a new culture and language. Uses film to further develop understanding. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.09.x.html">96.04.09</a> <br/> In order to create an understanding of the phases an immigrant goes through, this unit examines the motivations, movement, and experiences that accompany immigration. Families share in some of the activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.10.x.html">96.04.10</a> <br/> In an attempt to have pupils understand that this country began as a nation of immigrants and continues as such, this unit uses playwriting lessons to lead students to a final project, an immigration drama. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1996/4/96.04.11.x.html">96.04.11</a> <br/> Through a variety of activities which should easily involve pupils, this unit follows the steps taken in immigration. Relates to the Native American TAG curriculum. </p>
</main>