---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1982/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1982/1/82.01.03.x.html">82.01.03</a> <br/> Through the use of mystery novels, the students work in cooperative groups to examine ethnic groups represented in the development of the plots in each novel. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/1/82.01.07.x.html">82.01.07</a> <br/> This unit uses the mystery novel to help develop fluency in French. Lessons also help increase knowledge of French culture. Contains pupil involving lessons. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.01.x.html">82.02.01</a> <br/> Students will learn different styles of autobiographical writing through the use of a variety of ethnic novels. The students will write autobiographies modeling the styles of the authors they have studied. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.02.x.html">82.02.02</a> <br/> By using autobiographies, poetry, and related literature, this unit focuses on community, love, and family issues as a way to promote writing autobiographies. Interesting daily writing motivators. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.04.x.html">82.02.04</a> <br/> Through the use of this unit, students will read many autobiographies that stimulate learning about minority cultures. Includes step by step procedures to motivate students to write daily. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.05.x.html">82.02.05</a> <br/> Through the use of this unit, students will become familiar with different writings that describe different cultures. Students will also compare experiences that are described in the autobiographies to those of their own lives. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.06.x.html">82.02.06</a> <br/> This unit attempts to develop both student reading ability and an understanding of personalities from United States history. Contains a number of specific lessons and an ample list of audio-visual materials. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/2/82.02.08.x.html">82.02.08</a> <br/> This unit will utilize autobiographies in an effort to inform students of black history. Key topics developed will be social conditions, personal experiences, and the economics of the African American communities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/3/82.03.01.x.html">82.03.01</a> <br/> This unit is designed to evaluate the history of Japan and the events that shaped Japanese-American relations. Focuses on the use of research skills to develop reports. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/3/82.03.04.x.html">82.03.04</a> <br/> This unit analyzes the Civil Rights movements and the effects various presidential administrations had upon the movement. Examines events in American society that support efforts of the movement. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/3/82.03.05.x.html">82.03.05</a> <br/> Role playing strategies are utilized to encourage communication among students about United States government issues. Makes effective use of writing skills by allowing the students to write letters and conduct interviews that pertain to Language-Minority Students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/3/82.03.06.x.html">82.03.06</a> <br/> This unit uses Supreme Court decisions to address segregation issues. Includes related literature supplement on the issue of segregation. Many written assignments are coupled with group discussions. Meets many content area objectives: American History, Race Relations (Sociology), and Law. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/4/82.04.01.x.html">82.04.01</a> <br/> This unit introduces students to European influence on African lifestyles. Novels read by students will clarify political and social institutions associated with Africa. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/4/82.04.02.x.html">82.04.02</a> <br/> Literature, film, and slides are used to give an overview of China in early 1980s. Interesting comparison between American schools and Chinese schools. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/4/82.04.06.x.html">82.04.06</a> <br/> Unit presents a timeline of events that shaped the history of Black music. <br/> Presents an interdisciplinary approach to teaching jazz music. Students will enjoy folk dances, sculpting clay, and researching famous composers. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/4/82.04.07.x.html">82.04.07</a> <br/> This unit encourages use of research skills to gain knowledge about African mercenaries. Explores inter-African governments, Western governments, and global views that effect attitudes toward African mercenaries. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.02.x.html">82.05.02</a> <br/> Students will investigate the political development of Puerto Rico. Migration, government, and religion are some concepts addressed in this unit. Students will be able to interview people in Puerto Rican community to gain insight. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.03.x.html">82.05.03</a> <br/> Students will get hands-on experience in a variety of ethnic festivals and celebrations through the use of music, dance, folk crafts, and multi-ethnic foods. May be used in all disciplines and grade levels. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.04.x.html">82.05.04</a> <br/> Through this unit, students gain knowledge of Puerto Rico and reasons for migration as they read and analyze “The Oxcart” by René Marqués. Background information and interesting activities are included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.05.x.html">82.05.05</a> <br/> In this unit, students investigate the major countries in South America, their varying populations, natural resources, and economics. Unit has a strong emphasis on geography. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.06.x.html">82.05.06</a> <br/> This unit discusses roles and behaviors of women with an emphasis on Latin American women. Uses film, poetry, and prose to discuss stereotypes associated with women. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/5/82.05.09.x.html">82.05.09</a> <br/> This unit presents an overview of Puerto Rican folklore. Students will explore mythology as it relates to Puerto Rican life/culture and have an opportunity to write original folktales based on literary models of Puerto Rican folklore. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1982/6/82.06.10.x.html">82.06.10</a> <br/> This unit examines family structure, culture, and attitudes. Students will research their own family for information while reading and participating in discussions about families in our global community. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>