---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 78.01.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1978/1/78.01.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "Effective Methods for Teaching Paragraph Development"
unitAuthor: "Paul Limone"
keywords: "General Composition Writing Instruction"
recommendedFor: ""
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 78.01.08:
</h4>
This extensively detailed unit is, virtually, a handbook for developing student expertise in the construction of written paragraphs. The author states often that imitation is the beginning of real learning for students. coupled with regular exposure to appropriate paragraph models is constant reliance upon “fill-in forms” (plan sheets, expansion sheets, and so on) that can be completed success-fully only when students can supply grammatically acceptable pieces of information. The program is described in the three major sections of the unit. The narrative portion begins with an explanation of the interdisciplinary nature of writing instruction. It then lists various classroom rules to which students and teacher must always adhere. Also covered is the importance of the writing process itself: pre-writing, planning, constant revision. The second section expands from an activity sequence that begins with learning to express opinions and culminates with outlines on teaching the four basic prose types: argumentation, exposition, description, and narration. The final section is virtually a step-by-step procedure for teaching very specific skill lessons. Sample exercises include model paragraphs, plan sheets, expansion sheets, and much more. All of the material could be readily adapted for classes from middle to high school. Suggestions for advanced lessons on writing about several types of literature close out the unit. Every teacher in every discipline could pick up this particular unit and find a wealth of ideas that will improve the writing skills of both the teacher and the student.
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
General Composition Writing Instruction
</i>
</p>
</body>