---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 17.02.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2017/2/17.02.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Extraordinary Life and Journey of Migratory Fish, through the Connecticut Watershed, the Long Island Sound, and the Atlantic Ocean"
unitAuthor: "Laura Carroll-Koch"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Developed for Science, Writing, Reading, and Social Studies, grade 6; recommended for Science and Writing, grades 3-5"
---
<main>
<p>
In this unit, students will learn about multiple ecosystems and the human impact to these systems as they follow migratory fish through their life cycles. As students study migratory fish, they will learn about the ecosystems of the rivers, Long Island Sound estuary, and the Atlantic Ocean. In this way, students will develop an understanding of the complex interactions between these ecosystems as well as their interdependent relationships in our global water system enabling the survival of these world travelers. This engaging thematic curriculum unit is designed for students of 3rd through 6th grades to explore the more complex ecosystems of the Long Island Sound watershed. This unit builds upon a prior unit I wrote called, “Just Ask! Exploring Marine Life of Long Island Sound.” /curriculum/units/2013/4/13.04.02.x.html
</p>
<p>
Through this study, students will learn the fundamental principles and interactions between multiple ecosystems and the marine creatures that swim within them. As students develop an appreciation and deeper understanding of these marine creatures and each ecosystem, students will more fully understand the significance of the human impact of these systems and be inspired to invest in potential solutions. This problem based unit will build core knowledge of watershed science, our global water system, and the migratory fish that move through these marine environments as students ask questions, read, write and investigate these topics.
</p>
<p>
(Developed for Science, Writing, Reading, and Social Studies, grade 6; recommended for Science and Writing, grades 3-5)
</p>
</main>