---
layout: "unit"
title: "14.02.07: Relationship Building within the School and Classroom Community"
path: "/curriculum/units/2014/2/14.02.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Relationship Building within the School and Classroom Community"
unitAuthor: "Medea E. Lamberti-Sanchez"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 14.02.07:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Introduction
</li>
<li>
The Problem
</li>
<li>
Rationale
</li>
<li>
Background Information on Emotional Connections, Belonging, and Commonalities
</li>
<li>
Objectives for the Unit
</li>
<li>
Literature
</li>
<li>
Goals of the Unit
</li>
<li>
Strategies for the Unit
</li>
<li>
Classroom Activities
</li>
<li>
Classroom Activity II: A Role-Play Activity with the Support Staff
</li>
<li>
Classroom Activity III- A Shared Experience
</li>
<li>
Internet Resources
</li>
<li>
Teacher Reading List
</li>
<li>
Suggested Student Independent Reading List
</li>
<li>
Appendix A
</li>
<li>
Appendix B: Implementing District and State Standards
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/2014/2/14.02.07.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<h2>
Introduction
</h2>
<p>
Arriving back from summer vacation can be a very anxious time for both teachers and students especially those who are new to the building. The climate of the building is welcoming and warm as the students openly greet one another in an attempt to develop new relationships. As time goes by, the climate of the building changes, relationships that once existed may no longer exist, and the tensions' between teachers, administrators, and students might be on the rise. The climate and the community is changing, but not for the better. So, what makes the school community change so rapidly and why? Is it the lack of communication between people that makes the relationships or bonds less effective, or is it the lack of regard that others have when the classroom or school community goes through a hardship? The question of what makes a school and/or class community stronger is explored throughout the unit. The unit offers suggestions for building better communities throughout the school building. My suggestions are suggestions only, so it is up to the individual teacher to decide if they will adapt or modify them based upon the needs of the particular building. The unit will discuss the importance of the individual being a community builder, a clear communicator, and above all, creating an atmosphere of mutual respect, so that everyone feels invested in the education that they are receiving in the classroom.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
The Problem
</h2>
<p>
On the very first day of school, the students who have already established themselves with their peers are looking to rekindle their old friendships, or continue with them, while others who are new are struggling to find a social group to belong to. In retrospect, the teachers also yearn to reconnect with those team mates with whom they were close to, and tend to back away from those teachers with whom they don't necessarily get along with. For our students, some of them can't wait to go back to school because their friends are waiting for them, while others do not wish to be a part of the social group that are others are a part of. These mixed feelings and emotions that exist in this social institution, which we call school, can ultimately lead to power struggles, fights, arguments, and a community that is not conducive for learning. Students who do not feel respected tend to not do well with their peers or develop relationships that are not personable.  What if students were able to interact with all members of their school community, including the support staff without a disregard for their function within the building?  What if all of the classes, in all of the grades, were aiming to build better relationships, wouldn't school be so much better for children?
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Rationale
</h2>
<p>
Over the past two years, I have taught the same group of students both in fifth grade and sixth grade and the same problems have existed: disrespect, lack of shared participation, and peers fighting against peers.  In my experience, our students are not learning strategies to reconcile their disagreements; they are resorting to fighting with words and fists. I think that it students are taught from the beginning of the year, team building skills then there might be less power struggles, fights, and ill relations.  Therefore, the unit must be completed in September when the students are learning about one another, and learning how to co-exist in an environment where a variety of challenges are present because this is where the tone of the school and classroom is set. If teachers want an environment where there is mutual respect, and uninterrupted by classroom disruptions then community building must begin during the first week of school
</p>
<p>
The classroom community is one that should not be disrupted by students who cannot get along, or who argue when different perspectives are shared.  Students should feel as if they have a shared stake in their learning, and that it is a collective effort not just from one individual, but from everyone. Teachers and staff need to be encouraged to build their classroom communities based upon the pillars of character( respect, integrity, safety, and excellence) then students will be able to respect various viewpoints and find something in common that ignites success and belonging. Students need to be able to reflect upon their own behavior and judge if their behavior isn't good and find a way to make their behavior better. Students need to understand that they play an integral role in the function of the classroom. They need to be able to have conversations and listen to each other's viewpoints, and if there are differences, then the students need to know how to handle them in a respectful manner.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Background Information on Emotional Connections, Belonging, and Commonalities
</h2>
<p>
When students can relate to each other and are invested in a common interest, they share an emotional connection, which can be defined as "the commitment and belief that members have shared and will share history, common places, and time together, and similar experiences" (Aronson and Mills, 1959). This is the teacher's hope when their students enter the classroom in September. Very little is known about each other's interests or dislikes, so he or she would hope that his or her classroom will share history and become active members of the classroom community.   Membership is defined as "the feeling that one has invested part of oneself to become a member and therefore has a right to belong" (Aronson and Mills, 1959).  Everyone has the right to belong within their school community. Adolescents, especially, have difficulty connecting with their peers if they do not know them socially, or personally. The success rate of the students depends on the connections made with people within the school community and the relationships that are built with each other. When students feel like they belong, the issue of behavior becomes almost non-existent because everyone has a chance at achieving a common goal, or a shared reward. Belonging is defined as," the feeling, belief, and expectation that one fits in the group and has a place there, a feeling of acceptance by the group, and a willingness to sacrifice for the group" (McMillan (1976).
</p>
<p>
American Psychologist, Abraham Maslow, included in his 1943 paper, A Theory of Human Motivation, a hierarchy of needs that every human must have in order to ensure his or her success. In his pyramid of needs, is the need for belonging. He stated that human relationships drive behavior, and that in order to avoid the feeling of loneliness, one should be involved in any type of social group that allows one to feel accepted and loved (Cherry, Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, 2014) The feeling of belonging plays an important role in satisfying a very basic need. Children can fulfill this need by belonging to sports organizations, dance classes, music classes, and the classroom where intimate relationships are formed. Friends are the links to building a classroom community that is respectful and supportive to one another. They need to feel good when their peers are around, not lonely or scared to make new friends; especially if the students are new to the school; their peers are the first intimate relationships that they have. The classroom community is one that should be built upon a shared goal of respect, so that these relationships and the need to belong come easily to the students. It is suggested that team based projects and social events promote that feeling of belonging among group individuals.
</p>
<p>
Since adolescence is a difficult stage in life, students need to feel accepted among their peers.  Middle School children need an outlet to be able to share ideas, thoughts, and activities, so the emotional need is supported and team building activities need to be explored. Students can take solace in the idea that they are not alone, and that they do have the support from their peers to exhibit positive behavior. Students need to be able to listen to each other's perspectives and embrace the challenges that different perspectives may present within the classroom.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Objectives for the Unit
</h2>
<p>
The reading and writing objectives for this unit will align with the Common Core State Standards and will consist of students being able to draw information from multiple  and digital resources to develop and organize their writing in a concise manner. According to the Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts students are expected to "draw evidence from literary or informational text to support analysis, reflection, and research as well as use their knowledge to engage in a range of collaborative discussions about the topic". Students will be offered a variety of ways to engage in meaningful discussions, work cooperatively, and independently, while still being able to express shared ideas. The students will also learn how to effectively take notes and write a descriptive narrative about their experiences using graphic organizers like essay organizers, Venn diagrams that serve to compare and contrast information, the classic KWL chart (know, what to know, and lean chart), and Cornell notes to that force the students to make meaning out of their questions that they are asking so that the students can think more critically about the topic at hand. Other standards include those for speaking and listening skills. The students will also read three major novels: The Skin I'm In by Sharon Flake, The Great Fire by Jim Murphy, and No More Dead Dogs by Gordon Korman. The novels presented are fiction and non-fiction. They are from the New Haven Public School's Plugged In literacy curriculum written by Janet Allen for sixth grade students. The books will be spread throughout the course of the unit and the year.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Literature
</h2>
<p>
The students will begin reading The Skin I'm In, by Sharon Flake, which is the first core novel and they will discuss the role that the school community has on the main character, Maleeka. The students will discuss how her classmates bullied her instead of supported her because of the color of her skin. The students will also explore how Maleeka reacts to the teasing and taunting and to her own situation. They will notice how the community secludes her, and forces her to seek out her own way to stand up for herself even if no other classmate is willing to stand by her. This is a very powerful book to teach because the students immediately feel empathy for the main character and the reactions that the students display immediately sparks student discourse about the power of relationships and the effect they have on the classroom both positively and negatively.
</p>
<p>
In the second book, The Great Fire, by Jim Murphy, the fate of Chicago is built upon the communities' support for each other during the disaster of 1871 to rebuild the city from its ashes. The book was based upon primary resources (survivors of the fire) and shows how the people's support for each other and the rebuilding of its town reunited them with the hope that they needed to recover and ban together in unity and strength. Here, the portrait of community is positive. The students watch as the characters reacts to the fire and face the disaster with courage. The students will look for connections between today's disasters and this disaster and think about what would happen if the community did not ban together to help one another. What would be the outcome? The team building goal is based on the same idea, if students in the classroom did not learn to help each other out, what would happen to the environment of the classroom?
</p>
<p>
In the third book, No More Dead Dogs, by Gordon Korman, the school community is split between the drama club and the football team. The main character, Wallace, must choose which community he belongs to, if not both. He must decide where he fits. This is a hard task for most of us because we tend to go with where people want us to go, not where we really want to go. Wallace likes his new drama club and steps back from the football club, and now his classmates shun him. The students will tend to focus on the relationships that Wallace built with the drama club and watch how negatively the football team treats him because of his decision. This is an interesting book to get the students to think about the community in which they belong to in school, and whether or not their own communities force their peers to be placed where they don't really belong or feel comfortable in.
</p>
<p>
All three of the books force the students to view the role of community differently and ask themselves what community means to them. There will be writing prompts with an opportunity to share responses as well as meaningful opportunities to explore the definition of community as it relates to the characters of the stories and themselves.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Goals of the Unit
</h2>
<p>
The goals of the unit are to build a better classroom community through finding commonalities, fostering a sense of belonging and developing better relationships. It is the intent of the unit that the students engage in rich conversations about topics that are relevant to the interests of the students in order to build knowledge and share common experiences. It is ideal if the students come up with meaningful questions that they can ask of their peers and decide which ones are not meaningful to ask.
</p>
<p>
These questions can provide a chance for students to talk openly about how they experience community at home and whether or not their neighborhood supports its families during times of need, hardship, or joy. The unit will attempt to obtain these goals not only through application of these strategies, but through cooperative learning projects filtered in throughout the duration of the unit.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Strategies for the Unit
</h2>
<p>
What are the strategies that this unit will focus on?
</p>
<p>
The primary strategy that the unit will involve will be to get the students to interact more with each other and learn to have purposeful conversations in a respectful manner.    Team building will teach individuals how to communicate effectively, cooperate, and be problem solvers in difficult situations. As teachers we know that it is very important for our students to work cooperatively in small groups, so by teaching these students will be able to apply them to real world situations.
</p>
<p>
Team building strengthens the group of people as well as motivates them to become more familiar with each other. Bonds are reinforced and team members feel more inclined to produce a project that is carefully crafted. Team building is shown to have positive effects on teams as long as the group building activities are not asking someone to be put in an awkward predicament because then the individuals will back down rather than cooperate and the exercises will have the opposite effect. This strategy will be most effective when students are unfamiliar with each other but eager to learn more and form these closer classroom bonds.
</p>
<p>
Another strategy that is equally important is teaching the students empathy, which will be done through the shadowing activity because it will ask the students to change their perspectives on the stereotypes surrounding the various jobs of the support staff. When the students perform the job of the support staff, then they will be able to gain new insights about the manner of the job rather than make fun of it or mock it because of lacked knowledge. The students will gain the knowledge that they need in order to make better judgments about the job that the support staff performs on a daily basis.
</p>
<p>
Student discourse, another great strategy used in the unit, can serve an important function: to engage learners, connect student experiences, and increase comprehension of the subject matter. Students will determine what is the most meaningful to them and start to build their relationships with others from there. According to Boise State University's Jeffrey Wilhelm, "By bringing the students' background knowledge to the learning table, students will find ways to connect to the topic and will have activated some basis for creating meaning for what they are discussing and students are in charge of their own learning through questions about and discussion of the topic with peers, parents, and teachers." This inquiry based learning approach promotes student led discussions and invites more learning about the subject. Discussion synthesizes the inquiry that surrounds the topics. Students need to be able to share ideas without a fear of ridicule.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Classroom Activities
</h2>
<p>
The following three sample lesson plans are provided for teachers to use, modifying as they see fit according to their classroom makeup and time period. There is a lesson to represent each of the strategies present within the unit. The team building activities can be made by the teacher or they can be found on the internet websites like the ones I have listed, or any other social media site like Pinterest where the teacher might find great ideas for their classroom. I liked the activity that I found on http://www.cchealth.org/ because it was about students having the same interests, a major contribution to developing better classroom relationships. I did tailor it and modify it.
</p>
<h3>
Activity One: An Exercise in Team Building- This activity was taken and modified courtesy of http://www.cchealth.org/
</h3>
<p>
Objective: Students will identify common interests and understand how common interests play an important role in the organization of group discussions and developing relationships.
</p>
<p>
Sign Up Here
</p>
<p>
Materials: 6-10 pieces of large chart paper, tape, pencils, colored markers, and paper.
</p>
<p>
Preparation: Put pieces of the chart paper around the room. Choose topics that you would like the students to explore. There needs to be a different topic on each of the pieces of chart paper. You may also want to put a question alongside the topic to generate more responses from the topic. It is up to the teacher and the time that he or she has with that particular class. The list below gives the teacher some options for topics. One can use any of them, or come up with your own based on the age of the students.
</p>
<p>
Topics for Discussion are to be posted on the chart paper
</p>
<p>
I like to work on computers. (What programs do you know?)
</p>
<p>
I can speak a language other than English. (Which Language?)
</p>
<p>
I like to travel in the U. S. or abroad.  Where have you Been?)
</p>
<p>
Making friends is an important part of my life. (Who are your best friends?)
</p>
<p>
My family is one of the things that make me happy.
</p>
<p>
There are things that I would like to change in this school. (What?)
</p>
<p>
There are things that I would like to change in our community. (What?)
</p>
<p>
I have helped with a classroom event, or outside activity (after-school program, church fair)
</p>
<p>
The teacher can sit his or her timer, and instruct participants to walk around the room, look at the different topics, and sign their name on any of the sheets that represent topics in which they have an interest, and answer the questions on each sheet.
</p>
<p>
Discussion
</p>
<p>
After everyone has had a chance to sign the sheets, ask one person to read the results of the chart paper topics.  On a piece of chart paper, the students can chart the interests of the group and list all the different interest of the group. The teacher can prompt the students about the variety of interests that the students see on the chart paper. The teacher can ask the students which chart paper had the least amount of interests present and which had the most. The teacher can ask the students to discuss the interests of the students and talk about those interests.
</p>
<p>
Synthesis
</p>
<p>
The students will begin to explain with the help of the teacher how these skills are important for community organizing and how each skill will contribute to their interests in a group when decision-making, or collectively coming up with ideas that will be perused in the classroom. Students can talk about why having different interests are valuable and important for the culture of the classroom.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Classroom Activity II: A Role-Play Activity with the Support Staff
</h2>
<p>
Objective
</p>
<p>
Students will be able to build community within the building with a member of the support staff (i.e. nurse, custodian, etc.) Students will be able to gain new perspectives about the role that these individuals play and understand why they are important for the improvement of the school community.
</p>
<p>
Materials: chart paper, pencils, and writing paper
</p>
<p>
Preparation and Procedure
</p>
<p>
The teacher will choose five important members of the support staff and ask them if they would participate in the shadowing activity. The teacher can choose how long or short of time period that the students will stay with the member of the support staff. Before the students shadow these community members, the teacher should ask them to come into the classroom and provide a description of the job that they perform. This is a great chance for conversations to ignite between the students and the staff. Students can ask them a particular question and decide who they would like a chance to shadow with for the next week. It is ideal that the students rotate with each support staff member. The teacher should have the students generate questions to ask the members of the support staff, and should ask those selected staff members if they can take show the students what it is like to perform their job in the building.
</p>
<p>
The students will be divided into smaller groups, perhaps four to five students per staff member and spend part of the day shadowing them. The students can watch the interactions among other staff members and students throughout the building and see the actual job performed. For example, if the student is shadowing the custodian, and the student watches the custodian clean the cafeteria, and another student throws garbage all over the floor, then the students shadowing the custodian will see the amount of work that is needed to clean the building and will learn how it feels to "walk in someone else's shoes" for the day. Hopefully, the students will gain a new perspective on how staff members influence the building's overall climate.
</p>
<p>
Discussion
</p>
<p>
After the shadowing/role-playing activity, the students will reflect on their experience after rotating through all support members' jobs. They will be given sentence starters to describe their experience: For example, today I realized or I learned this, are just a few sentence starters that the students can use to reflect. Other students can choose to write a journal entry or a letter that expresses their experience.  The teacher should open up the conversations about their experience and perspectives on what they saw and how they handled certain situations that aroused throughout the building.
</p>
<p>
Synthesis
</p>
<p>
The teacher will discuss how perspectives changed throughout the activity and prompt students to discuss the value of those support staff members have on the community of the school. The teacher can ask the students to report out or share their reflections and discuss ways that they can encourage others to help out or make the school environment better for everyone in school. Perhaps, the students can share their experiences with other classes, or ask those support staff members to work with smaller groups of students in order to pass on the experience. The teacher can always add to this idea or modify as needed to fit their students and their members of the school staff.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Classroom Activity III- A Shared Experience
</h2>
<p>
Objectives:
</p>
<p>
Students will use technology and a social media website, Tumblr to create a photo-essay/slideshow and present using their own recorded voices.
</p>
<p>
Materials: Photos, pencils, paper, construction paper, crayons, markers
</p>
<p>
Preparations:
</p>
<p>
Prior to the activity, students will be asked to bring in photos to share with others. The students can bring in family photos or any other photos that explain who they are. Students can reveal the pictures without providing any commentary or explanation of the photos.  Other students can ask questions about the photos or ask for a closer explanation of the photo.
</p>
<p>
Discussion:
</p>
<p>
In smaller groups, the students can share their photos and talk about their experiences and talk in small groups about what identifies then and makes them unique. Shared discussions on related experiences can help ignite questions about what kinds of things they value or believe in. Students, will then, create their photo collage. They can help each other on the website Tumblr, to upload their photos and proceed to record their voices. The students can share using descriptive details and sensory images that define their experiences.
</p>
<p>
Synthesis:
</p>
<p>
A rubric should be provided so students know what to include in their personal stories or collages. Each student should be ready to present their project and the teacher now has an audio document to share with others in the community.
</p>
<p>
Conclusion
</p>
<p>
The definition of community is one that can mean many different things. There is no exact definition that I can come up with to explain what it means. The classroom community needs to be stable, consistent, fair, and nurturing because without those characteristics, learning cannot take place; teaching and learning needs to happen in a supportive classroom community where differences and individuality is welcomed by other students and shared. The following definition fits the goals of this unit and is the best one that I can find to explain what community means to me. This is according to David W. McMillan and David M. Chavis of the Peabody College of Vanderbilt University:
</p>
<p>
"Community is a feeling that members have of belonging, a feeling that members matter to one another and to the group, and a shared faith that members' needs will be met through their commitment to be together (McMillan, 1976).
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Internet Resources
</h2>
<p>
<font size="-1">
http://www.cchealth.org/
<p>
This site provides great team building exercises that can be used for icebreakers, team building, and energizers. I used the above exercise from this website.
</p>
<p>
http://www.teambuildingactivitiesforkidscentral.com/
</p>
<p>
This site discusses team building activities especially created for children.
</p>
<p>
http://www.showbeyond.com/show/home/
</p>
<p>
A story-sharing community website where students can create slideshow narratives and upload images
</p>
<p>
http://www.tikatok.com/classroom/
</p>
<p>
An award-winning website designed to let children write, illustrate, and publish their own stories
</p>
<p>
http://www.funteambuilding.com/
</p>
<p>
A website designed to enforce and motivate teacher team building strategies
</p>
<p>
http://www.figment.com/
</p>
<p>
A website where students can post stories for their peers to read and share
</p>
<p>
http://www.teachersourcebook.org/
</p>
<p>
An internet site that provides math and writing websites
</p>
<p>
http://www.readwritethink.org/
</p>
<p>
An internet website that features lesson plans in reading and writing
</p>
<p>
http://www.mindtools.com/
</p>
<p>
A website that features team building training and exercises
</p>
<p>
http://www.teachhub.com/
</p>
<p>
Articles on this website that talks about community team building exercises
</p>
<p>
http://www.deca.org/
</p>
<p>
A website that prepares adult for management jobs based upon team building activities
</p>
<p>
http://www.scholastic.com/
</p>
<p>
A website where teachers can find books and resources related to multiple topics of interests
</p>
<p>
http://www.tumblr.com/
</p>
<p>
A blogging and social media website where the students can upload videos and pictures
</p>
</font>
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Teacher Reading List
</h2>
<p>
<font size="-1">
Baskin, Thomas W. "Belongingness as a Protective Factor against Loneliness and Potential Depression in a Multicultural Middle School". The Counseling Psychologist. July 2010.Vol 38 626-651
<p>
An article that studies how belongingness is a strength-based productive factor that is a buffer against the negative effects of low peer acceptance and high loneliness.
</p>
<p>
Buton, Neel, M.D. "Understanding self-deception, self-sabotage, and more". Psychology Today. Sussex Publishers, LLC, 2012.
</p>
<p>
The article focuses on Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
</p>
<p>
Field, Sharon. "Fostering self-determination through building productive relationships in the classroom". Wayne State University College of Education. Detroit, Michigan. Intervention in School and Clinic. September, 2012. Vol.48: 6-14
</p>
<p>
The article focuses on relationship building as the key to successful transitions for disabled and non-disabled students
</p>
<p>
Frey, Nancy. Common Core English Language Arts in a PLC at Work, Grades 3-5. Solution Tree, 2012
</p>
<p>
The book examines Common Core Standards in the English Language Arts area of study
</p>
<p>
Frydenberg, Erica. "Interrelationships between coping, school connectedness, and wellbeing". Australian Journal of Education. November 2009. Vol.53. Article 4
</p>
<p>
The article studies the interrelationships between school connectedness, coping, and well-being among middle school students.
</p>
<p>
Henderson, Anne T.: Mapp, Karen L. "A new wave of Evidence: The Impact of School, Family, and Community Connections on Student Achievement. Annual Synthesis, Publication: 2002
</p>
<p>
The article focuses on children who are at risk and the impact of parent and community involvement on student achievement and effective strategies to connect schools, families, and community
</p>
<p>
Irwin, Michael. "Hanging out with mates": Friendship quality and its effects on Academic Endeavors and Social Behaviors". Australian Journal of Education. August 2013, Vol.57. Issue 2
</p>
<p>
The article focuses on adolescent males who develop relationships with other males have better academic success and better behavior.
</p>
<p>
Osterman, Karen. "Students' Need for Belonging in the School Community" Review of Educational Research. Sage Journal Publications. Fall 2000, Vol.70.no 3
</p>
<p>
The article is about defining community as a feeling of belongingness within a group in the school community.
</p>
<p>
Peters, Melodie. "Community is the New Density". AFT Connecticut: A Union of Professionals, Rocky Hill CT. 2009
</p>
<p>
The article focuses on members of the educational community who joined forces with the communities where they lived and worked to provide an effective way to move forward and build better economic and political communities.
</p>
</font>
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Suggested Student Independent Reading List
</h2>
<p>
<font size="-1">
Collins, Susan. The Hunger Games. Scholastic Inc, New York, NY 2010
<p>
The book showcases twelve different communities of people, where one individual from each community must defend themselves until one survivor survives. A fight for humanity and love, only one will survive.
</p>
<p>
Collins, Susan. Catching Fire: Scholastic Inc, New York, NY 2013
</p>
<p>
The book focuses on one individual's journey to reconcile an injustice that was committed in the different communities.
</p>
<p>
Collins, Susan. MockingJay: Scholastic Inc, New York, NY 2014
</p>
<p>
The book focuses on one individual's struggle who to trust and who not to trust in the members her community
</p>
<p>
Flake,  Sharon. The Skin I'm In: Hyperion Books, New York, NY, 2007
</p>
<p>
One young woman struggles to survive in a school community where she is teased because of her skin color and learns to stand up for herself and the show her school community that she loves the skin she's in.
</p>
<p>
Hinton, S.E. The Outsiders: MassMarket Publications, United States, 1967
</p>
<p>
Two Rival gangs struggle to coexist in a world on two different sides of the railroad tracks.
</p>
<p>
Korman, Gordon. No More Dead Dogs: Hyperion Books, New York, NY, 2000
</p>
<p>
Wallace is torn between two communities: The football community and the drama club community, which one will win out when Wallace is asked to join the drama club as part of his punishment for writing a bad review of a book he was asked to read.
</p>
<p>
Lowry, Lois. The Giver. Dell Laurel-Leaf, New York, NY. 1993
</p>
<p>
Jonas, a young man, is the center of this novel that places him in a dystopian world of the future, and must make the decision to leave his community and venture into another world.
</p>
<p>
Lowry, Lois. Gathering Blue. Dellacorte Press Books, New York, NY. 2006
</p>
<p>
The sequel to The Giver, an outcast of the community, is given a special job where she must use her skills to uncover a world that no one knows exists
</p>
</font>
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Appendix A
</h2>
<p>
Background Information on Betsy Ross Arts Magnet School
</p>
<p>
I am a Regular Education sixth grade Language Arts and Social Studies teacher. I teach in an inclusive classroom setting with both regular and Special Education students. There is a Special Education teacher with whom I collaborate and consult for the modification and adaptation of curriculum.  I teach two sets of children. There are twenty students in each of my classrooms, forty students total; four of whom have individualized Education Plans, which call for many adaptations and modifications to the regular curriculum taught in the classroom.  Our students' abilities vary in functional levels. Their abilities extend from basic learners to advanced level learners. All of the students with disabilities have differing disabilities that range from intellectually disabled to autistic.
</p>
<p>
Presently two sixth grade classes will be participating in this unit. Even so, my classes are rich in diversity and ethnicity. It is a hope that next year, all of the sixth grade classes can participate in the unit and contribute to the student experiences that are shared throughout the unit. In addition, the student experiences that this unit is drawn from will contribute to the topic of community and the student-led discourse that will be present within the classroom. It is the hope that every student in the building contributes to the school's climate in a positive manner from the beginning of the school year to the end of the school year.
</p>
<p>
My students fall into three categories: Caucasian, African American, and Hispanic. Each category of students has offered personal experiences that stimulate wonderful conversations about their cultural backgrounds and ethnicities. It is for this reason, that the subject of community within the classroom will lend itself well to the curriculum. Students can share common perspectives and experiences. These student led conversations help stimulate richer relationships. The students will feel more comfortable with one another and will learn to develop better relationships which will certainly help with cooperative learning exercises within the classroom and outside the classroom to enrich the climate of the classroom.
</p>
<p>
Betsy Ross Arts Magnet School is a middle school that serves students in grades five through eight. Betsy Ross serves urban and suburban students from surrounding areas of New Haven and it is for this reason that this is an inter-district school because all students from these areas are encouraged to attend the New Haven Public School System. Betsy Ross is founded on the principle that through the arts, students will think, learn, and see their academics in an innovative, challenging way. Each student attends five academic subjects (Math, Language Arts, Science, Social Studies, and an Enrichment class(French, Chinese, Spanish, Reading or Math Enrichment) and one specific performing arts class (Theatre, Dance, Visual Arts, Photography, Video, Music) every day.
</p>
<p>
Betsy Ross is made up of artistic, creative young people with a strong interest in the arts that is shown through their poetry writings, group presentations, and performances in the theatre, dance showcases, and the annual arts shows. Betsy Ross provides a performance platform for the students to connect their ideas to the community in a way that connects personal experiences of the individuals through the arts platform.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Appendix B: Implementing District and State Standards
</h2>
<p>
After completing this unit, the students will have worked on the following Connecticut Common Core Standards for Reading and Writing:
</p>
<p>
Common Core Standards-Speaking and Listening Skills
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1: Engage effectively in a range of collaborative one on one, in groups, and teacher led with diverse partner on grade 6 topics, texts, and issues building on each other's ideas and expressing their own clearly.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1.B: Follow rules for collegial discussions, set specific goals and deadlines, and define individual roles as needed
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL.6.1D: Review the key ideas expressed and demonstrate understanding of multiple perspectives through reflection.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.SL 6.5: Include multimedia components (graphics, images, music, sound, and visual displays in presentations to clarify information.
</p>
<p>
Common Core Standards: Reading and Writing Standards
</p>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3A: Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using effective techniques and descriptive details as well as well structured event sequences.
</p>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3.B: Use narrative techniques, such as a dialogue pacing and description to develop experience, events, and characters
</p>
<p>
CCSS.W.6.3.D: Use phrase words, and relevant descriptive details and sensory languages to convey experiences and events
</p>
<p>
CCSS RH.6.B.2: Determine the central ideas or information of primary or secondary sources to provide an accurate summary of the source distinct from the prior knowledge or opinions
</p>
</body>