---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 82.07.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1982/7/82.07.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Genetics"
unitAuthor: "Margaret M. Loos"
keywords: "Biology Birth Defects Down’s Syndrome Sickle Cell Anemia Human Genetics Defects"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for 10th and 11th grade Human Physiology, Biology Higher Levels"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 82.07.03:
</h4>
This unit has been designed to cover some of the current material in genetics.  It consists of ten lessons with development of a working vocabulary and appropriate activities.  Each lesson concerns itself with a different aspect of the science of human genetics and relies on the teacher’s background to complete the coverage of the material. The topics of the lessons are:
<p>
1.  In the Beginning.  This is a reading assignment on early genetics and geneticists.
</p>
<p>
2.  So What’s a Chromosome?  Current concepts of chromosomes and their examination in the form of Karyotypes are introduced.
</p>
<p>
3.  Some Heavy Molecules...and Some Heavy Discoveries explore the make-up of nucleotides and DNA structure.
</p>
<p>
4.  RNA.  This section presents the several kinds of RNA and information on coding in RNA for amino acids and proteins.
</p>
<p>
5.  Genes, Alleles and Possibilities.  The definition of a gene in terms of molecular biology is combined with Mendelian genetics.
</p>
<p>
6.  Mitosis and Meiosis Revisited Updates and reviews the steps of the cell cycle.
</p>
<p>
7.  Sex Chromosomes and Others.  Presents what can go wrong with chromosomes in general and sex chromosomes in particulars
</p>
<p>
8.  Autosomal Recessive Disorders.  Introduces the problem of these disorders, lists some and assigns individual research on them.
</p>
<p>
9.  What Can Go Wrong and Teratogens.  Gives information relating molecular biology of genetics to birth defects, It should be supplemented by a film from the March of Dimes on birth defects.
</p>
<p>
10.  Genetic Engineering.  Acquaints students with a simple version of recombinant technique and hopefully will arouse curiosity about what’s happening in this field.
</p>
<p>
Simple tasks in manipulating the material are presented throughout the unit and the assignments demand the use of outside research and reading in current literature.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for 10th and 11th grade Human Physiology, Biology Higher Levels)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Biology Birth Defects Down’s Syndrome Sickle Cell Anemia Human Genetics Defects
</i>
</p>
</body>