---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1992/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.02.x.html">92.01.02</a> <br/> This unit provides a detailed description of current trends in adolescent law with a specific focus on the development of bilingual education from a social and legal standpoint. Step by step description or a mock trial to be conducted by students is useful. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.03.x.html">92.01.03</a> <br/> Using the Public Broadcasting Documentary "Eyes on The Prize," students will explore the barriers of discrimination from a variety of perspectives within the African American community. Role-play activities provide much insight. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.04.x.html">92.01.04</a> <br/> This unit explores the impact of racism on the development of educational curriculum and our society at large. Also examines court decisions and social trends dealing with bilingual education and desegregation. Activities incorporate new learning and promote empathy and understanding. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.05.x.html">92.01.05</a> <br/> Acknowledging current trends in public education to mainstream special needs students, this unit provides strategies to sensitize teachers and students to the needs and rights of special education students. Detailed descriptions and simulations promote needed understanding. Lessons in Braille and sign language are very interesting. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.07.x.html">92.01.07</a> <br/> This unit highlights the role of race, finance, and the Judiciary in American society and in public schools, with the intent of defining equality in relation to educational opportunity. Student interpretation and analysis on relevant court cases as well as a short dramatic play are key activities in this unit. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/1/92.01.09.x.html">92.01.09</a> <br/> This unit provides an in depth exploration of the legal processes through which segregation and subsequently de-segregation were legitimized in school systems throughout the U.S. Student conducted interviews of family and community members are particularly interesting. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.01.x.html">92.02.01</a> <br/> From the perspective of the Aztecs, this unit examines their conquest and downfall. Contains considerable background information. Activities include role playing, field trips, response journals, and videos. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.02.x.html">92.02.02</a> <br/> An interesting investigation of the French Creoles of Louisiana, their history and culture. Interesting material on holidays, customs, music, dress, food, and language is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.04.x.html">92.02.04</a> <br/> This unit examines the history of Haiti, Martinique, and Guadeloupe. Considerable historical background information is included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.05.x.html">92.02.05</a> <br/> A study of the Aztec Indians, this unit is aimed at children taught by a regular classroom teacher and a second language teacher. It contains considerable background information on history and culture. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.06.x.html">92.02.06</a> <br/> Interrelated with two previous units, this unit explores the interaction between Europe and the Americas starting with the period of conquest. Contains considerable historical information. <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1992/2/92.02.07.x.html">92.02.07</a> <br/> Following Columbus on his voyages to the New World, this unit devotes a small section to the plight of the Arawak Indians. Contains historical background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.01.x.html">92.03.01</a> <br/> This unit develops a general study of New Haven with an emphasis on the contributions of African Americans and Italians. Material includes considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.02.x.html">92.03.02</a> <br/> After examining the migration of African Americans from the Deep South to northern cities, this unit uses prose, non-fiction, poetry, drama, and human interest stories to develop an appreciation of a city's freshness and diversity. Unit contains considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.04.x.html">92.03.04</a> <br/> A comparative study of Florence, Italy; Tenochtitlan, Mexico; and Timbuktu, Africa, from 1450-1500, compares and contrasts these cultures with each other followed by a comparison with modern times. Unit contains considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.06.x.html">92.03.06</a> <br/> A look at New Haven includes an examination of its cultural diversity, employing guest speakers, field trips, and related videos. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.07.x.html">92.03.07</a> <br/> This unit employs a variety of approaches to motivate children to write effectively using topics related to the city. Suggestions are varied and should easily engage most students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/3/92.03.08.x.html">92.03.08</a> <br/> This unit presents in chronological order the role played by African Americans in the history of New Haven. Contains references to people, businesses, and organizations which have contributed to the city's development. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.01.x.html">92.04.01</a> <br/> Employing a literature connection, this unit uses Columbus's voyages, in part, to examine the cultures of native people he encountered. Highlights include a clearly developed research project and a series of lessons revolving around food exchanges. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.02.x.html">92.04.02</a> <br/> Through a literature based approach, this unit examines colonial times and the period around the American Revolution with emphasis on an African American presence. Use of field trips, art exploration, cooking, and fabric dyeing should easily engage students. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.03.x.html">92.04.03</a> <br/> This unit uses literature and art as a basis for understanding African American experiences during slavery and the Great Depression. The teacher is provided with considerable background information. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.04.x.html">92.04.04</a> <br/> The life and works of Jacob Lawrence and two books, each with a teenage African American character who comes to term with his/her race, are used to help to increase the self-esteem of black students while developing sensitivity on the part of Latino and white students. Offers teacher considerable information on topics. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.05.x.html">92.04.05</a> <br/> This unit links African American traditions with African American spirituals in order to motivate pupils to create meaningful visual art. Contains engaging art activities. <br/> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.06.x.html">92.04.06</a> <br/> This unit traces African American storytelling, from the oral tradition during slavery to the modern tales conveyed in rap. Interesting lesson on rapping. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.07.x.html">92.04.07</a> <br/> Though not focusing on particular ethnic or racial groups, this unit presents the diversity of the city through various artists and encourages students to do the same. Engaging art lessons included. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/5/92.05.08.x.html">92.05.08</a> <br/> This unit studies African, Latino, and European cultures through music. Suggestions on holding festivals and celebrations are among interesting lessons presented. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.09.x.html">92.04.09</a> <br/> The unit uses a study of art as a springboard to study the works of Latino and African American poets, actors, and artists. Contains engaging art lessons. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.10.x.html">92.04.10</a> <br/> Through the works of various women artists and writers, this unit examines Latino, Asian, and African American culture. Contains significant background information and detailed lesson plans. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1992/4/92.04.11.x.html">92.04.11</a> <br/> This unit examines the countries of Ireland, Italy, and Puerto Rico in order to better understand the cultures they brought to America. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>