---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 84.01.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1984/1/84.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "A View of the River: Cellars, Columns and Porches"
unitAuthor: "Patricia K. Flynn"
keywords: "Nineteenth Century Architecture American Connecticut Fair Haven History"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Art classes, grades 7 and 8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 84.01.03:
</h4>
Situated between the Mill and Quinnipiac Rivers is the community of Fair Haven.  Originally known as the Neck and sold as farmland to its early settlers Fair Haven developed independently of New Haven.  Its history and growth greatly relied upon the presence of the Quinnipiac River.  On the eastern shore of the river is an area identified as Dragon which belonged to East Haven and later became part of Fair Haven (the Heights).  Together both areas of land enriched the history of New Haven.  The Quinnipiac River supported the community of Fair Haven during the nineteenth century with its oystering industry.
<p>
Varied architectural styles of homes can be found in Fair Haven. Since many of my students expressed embarrassment towards their home as a result of the work that we did with my unit of last year, it would be a valuable objective to develop a unit that would increase pride in the many fine architectural examples of homes built during the nineteenth century in Fair Haven.  An architectural tour of Fair Haven emphasizes three styles: Greek Revival, Italian Villa, and the Victorian.  Drawing and constructing activities accompany
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Art classes, grades 7 and 8)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Nineteenth Century Architecture American Connecticut Fair Haven History
</i>
</p>
</body>