---
layout: "page"
title: ""
path: "/curriculum/referencelists/diversity/1983/"
---
<main><a href="../../../guides/1983/4/83.04.01.x.html">83.04.01</a> <br/> Seeking to explore the motives and ideology behind the Civil Rights Movement, the SDS, the Women's Movement, Cultural radicals and LSD and the Vietnam protest, the author seeks to provide students with a feeling for these criticisms of America and the people who made them. <p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/5/83.05.07.x.html">83.05.07</a> <br/> This unit uses plays from the Mexican and Chicano cultures as a vehicle for language arts development. The four plays are high-interest with a low-reading level. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.02.x.html">83.06.02</a> <br/> Designed to broaden the student’s understanding of different cultural groups, this unit explores the history and traditions of Acadians or “Cajuns” of the United States. Aimed at French students, it includes a variety of hands-on activities integrating a number of curriculum areas. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.03.x.html">83.06.03</a> <br/> Aimed at middle school students, this unit explores the struggles and contributions made by Italian-Americans of New Haven. Includes many hands-on activities. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.04.x.html">83.06.04</a> <br/> Centering around three case studies of young Puerto Rican mothers, this unit examines the problem of teenage pregnancy in general and those problems unique to the Puerto Rican female and her family. Excellent list of available resources. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.05.x.html">83.06.05</a> <br/> Though its main focus examines bilingual education, this unit also attempts to give teachers and students an awareness of Puerto Rican culture. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.06.x.html">83.06.06</a> <br/> This unit examines secondary education in urban China from 1949 to 1982. It is a sequel to two previous units, one on China’s history (1840-1949) and a second on schools before and after the communist revolution. </p><p> <a href="../../../guides/1983/6/83.06.07.x.html">83.06.07</a> <br/> In order to show how a culture has survived time and distance, this unit connects folktales of African origin with those folktales of the African-American experience. It also attempts to research living history and folktales. <br/> <br/> 
</p></main>