---
layout: "unit"
title: "84.03.09: Hablamos español: An Oral Course for Students of Spanish"
path: "/curriculum/units/1984/3/84.03.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Hablamos espa–ol: An Oral Course for Students of Spanish"
unitAuthor: "John C. Warner"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 84.03.09:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Justification
</li>
<li>
Objectives And Strategies
</li>
<li>
Sample Lesson Plans
</li>
<li>
Teacher Bibliography
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/1984/3/84.03.09.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<h2>
JUSTIFICATION:
</h2>
One of the main goals of a language teacher is to get the students to use the language they are learning. More and more frequently, teachers are being asked to work orally with their students. There is a great need for students to have more exposure to oral language. It is for this reason that this unit has been developed. There is a need for a language curriculum to deal specifically with this type of oral language study.
<p>
Through this curriculum unit, students will take an imaginary trip through a Spanishspeaking country. The knowledge gained will allow them to function in this or any other primarily Hispanic community.
</p>
<p>
Because of a need for students of a language to develop oral/aural proficiency in that language, many of the exercises developed in this unit are listening/speaking exercises. The unit, or course, will therefore act as a supplement to other matters studied in class such as grammar. Grammatical structures per se will not be dealt with in this unit. Some exercises with necessary verb forms such as present tense and commands will appear, however.
</p>
<p>
Although this unit is initially being used on the Junior High School level, grades 68, it has been prepared for use in any level Spanish class where some oral work is being done. Beginning students of the language as well as those who are more proficient can benefit from this unit.
</p>
<p>
The shank of this unit is a series of dialogues in Spanish with their English translations which accompany the lesson plans for the: four major objectives of the unit. The dialogues are original, and each set is presented with a list of vocabulary for each given situation. All material is presented in such a way as to allow for easy duplication.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGIES:
</h2>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective One
<i>
<b>
TRAVEL Students will learn the vocabulary which will enable them to go to an Hispanic travel agency and plan a trip to a Spanishspeaking country.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
vocabulary which allows students to purchase an airplane ticket and to make hotel/motel reservations is presented to students on a ditto. (See sample lesson plans.)
<dt>
the included dialogue, “The Travel Agent” should be reproduced and presented to Students.
<dt>
the teacher can then go over the dialogue and vocabulary. After sufficient practice, students can role-play the dialogue for this particular situation.
<dt>
As a followup activity, students can write an original dialogue based on the situation with the teacher’s help. The classroom atmosphere and decor can easily be changed to depict that of a travel agency and students can discuss such things as airplane and hotel reservations, car rental, etc.
<dt>
Students can man to take a trip to one of the Hispanic Travel Agencies in the city to gather information for their imaginary voyage.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<i>
<b>
Objective Two
<i>
<b>
FOOD Through the use of dialogues and skits, once again, students can learn about the foods and eating customs of Puerto Rico and other Hispanic areas. They will learn how to order food in a restaurant while also gaining understanding of some of the typical foods of the Island.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
food vocabulary is presented on a ditto which the teacher can distribute to the students. (See sample lesson plans.)
<dt>
After the vocabulary has been mastered, the included “restaurant” dialogue can be duplicated and presented to the students.
<dt>
Students will read the dialogue with the teacher and then roleplay the different characters.
<dt>
It would be interesting to prepare a typical menu as one of the class projects and then to prepare some dishes which will be tasted in the classroom. It is always helpful to have some “handson activities” for the students especially where food is concerned.
<dt>
Students may wish to culminate this portion of the unit with a trip to one of the area’s Hispanic restaurants.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective Three
<i>
<b>
SHOPPING Once again, vocabulary for this section is presented on a ditto which can be duplicated and distributed to students. It may be helpful to subdivide the category of shopping into smaller more specific categories based on what the students or “tourists” are shopping for.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
By the end of this part of the unit, students will be able to function in many different shopping situations. Once again, through the use of dialogues, students will learn the vocabulary to shop for gift items and clothing so that they will be able to function in a department store in Spanish.
<dt>
It is always helpful to dramatize situations. Students should get used to the idea of using the language. The classroom can be converted to suit almost any situation. If students are actually involved in buying merchandise, they will better understand the material being presented.
<dt>
Students should plan to go into a store in an Hispanic neighborhood to shop using the Spanish which they have learned in the classroom.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective Four
<i>
<b>
MEDICAL Students will be able to function in Spanish during a medical emergency.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
Vocabulary dealing with parts of the body and illness can be duplicated and presented to students.
<dt>
Students will have to describe a pain in different parts of their bodies in Spanish. They will also have to describe any medical problems which they might have.
<dt>
Students can fill out sample medical forms and questionnaires in Spanish such as admitting forms and medical alert forms which accompany this unit and can be easily duplicated by the teacher.
<dt>
Students may wish to visit one of the health clinics or nursing homes in the area and do some volunteer work as there are often large Spanish-speaking populations in the facilities in this area. In this way, students can experience first hand the health related services provided in the Hispanic community and also be able to use the information gained in the classroom in a useful and productive fashion.
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
The following are Spanish dialogues with their English translations which accompany the lesson plans for the four major objectives of this unit. The dialogues are original and each set is preceded by a duallanguage vocabulary list for each situation. Additional materials are available for this unit through the YaleNew Haven Teachers Institute Office located at 53 Wall Street, New Haven.
<hr/>
<h2>
SAMPLE LESSON PLANS
</h2>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective One
<i>
<b>
TRAVEL The following is a duallanguage list of necessary vocabulary for students to use while visiting a travel agency.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
<i>
SPANISH
</i>
</td>
<td>
ENGLISH
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
la agencia de pasajes
</td>
<td>
ticket agency
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el billete (el boleto)
</td>
<td>
ticket
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el equipaje
</td>
<td>
baggage
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las maletas
</td>
<td>
the suitcases
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el estación
</td>
<td>
station
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el despacho de billetes
</td>
<td>
ticket office
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el talón
</td>
<td>
baggage check
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el despacho de equipajes
</td>
<td>
baggage office
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el aeropuerto
</td>
<td>
airport
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el asiento
</td>
<td>
seat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el tren
</td>
<td>
train
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el coche
</td>
<td>
railroad car
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el carro, automóvil
</td>
<td>
car
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el vapor
</td>
<td>
steam ship
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el avión
</td>
<td>
airplane
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el autobús, la guagua
</td>
<td>
bus
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el puerto
</td>
<td>
gate or port
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la ruta
</td>
<td>
route
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
embarcar
</td>
<td>
to leave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
visitar
</td>
<td>
to visit
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
salir
</td>
<td>
to depart
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
llegar
</td>
<td>
to arrive
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
darme
</td>
<td>
to give to me
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
subir
</td>
<td>
to climb in
</td>
</tr>
</table>
(All of the above verb forms can be used with the following . . .)
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
Tengo que . . .
</td>
<td>
I have to, ought to
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Tengo que visitar
</td>
<td>
I have to visit
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Quiero
</td>
<td>
I want to
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
quiero salir
</td>
<td>
I want to leave
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
¿dónde?
</td>
<td>
where?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
de prisa
</td>
<td>
quickly
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
aqu’
</td>
<td>
here
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
ya
</td>
<td>
already
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
aun no
</td>
<td>
not yet
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
sé
</td>
<td>
I know
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
ida y vuelta
</td>
<td>
round trip
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
un billete de ida y vuelta
</td>
<td>
a round trip ticket
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
<b>
<i>
Dialogo primero
</i>
</b>
</td>
<td>
La agencia de viajes
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
personajes:
</td>
<td>
El agente de viajes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td>
El cliente
</td>
</tr>
</table>
El agente: ¿Buenos dias (Buenas tardes) En que le podr’a ayudar?
<p>
El cliente: Buenos d’as (Buenas tardes) Yo quiero hacer un viaje a Puerto Rico. Necesito billetes y otra información.
</p>
<p>
El agente: Bueno. Usted necesita un billete de ida y vuelta ¿verdad? Cuando tiene que embarcar?
</p>
<p>
El cliente: Quiero llegar a San Juan el tres de agosto y quedarme all’ todo el mes.
</p>
<p>
El agente: Claro. Un boleto de avión de Nueva York a San Juan en segunda clase cuesta noventa pesos as’ que ida y vuelta costará ciento ochenta pesos.
</p>
<p>
El cliente: Pero no. . . . Yo lo quiero de primera clase.
</p>
<p>
El agente: Entiendo ahora. Ida y vuelta en primera clase costará dos cientos cincuenta pesos. Confirmaré las reservaciones y le llamaré por teléfono manana.
</p>
<p>
El cliente: Bueno y muchas gracias por su tiempo.
</p>
<p>
El agente: A sus órdenes.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogue One: The Travel Agency
</i>
</b>
<br/>
characters: Travel agent
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Client
</p>
<p>
Travel agent: Good day. How can I help you?
</p>
<p>
Client: Hello. I want to take a trip to Puerto Rico. I need some tickets and other information.
</p>
<p>
Travel agent: Very well. You need a round trip ticket, don’t you? When do you want to leave?
</p>
<p>
Client: I want to arrive in San Juan August 1st and stay the entire month.
</p>
<p>
Travel agent: Let’s see. A second class airline ticket from New York to San Juan costs ninety dollars, therefore, round trip would cost you one hundred eighty dollars.
</p>
<p>
Client: But no . . .  I don’t want second class. I wish to travel first class.
</p>
<p>
Travel agent: I understand now. Round trip first class will cost you two hundred fifty dollars. I shall confirm the reservations and call you tomorrow.
</p>
<p>
Client: Very well and thank you for your time.
</p>
<p>
Travel agent: At your service.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Conversación Primera: Viajando en Puerto Rico
</i>
</b>
<br/>
personajes: un estranjero
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
un puertorrique–o
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
un empleado
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: ¿Dónde está la estación del ferrocarril?
</p>
<p>
Puertorrique–o: Hay una en la calle Madero y Avenida del Sol y otra en la calle Bolival. ¿A qué estación necesita usted ir?
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: Para ir a Ponce, necesito salir por la estación del Norte. ¿A qué hora sale el primer tren?
</p>
<p>
Puertorrique–o: El primer tren sale muy temprano por la ma–ana.
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: Entonces será necesario tomar un carro para ir de prisa.
</p>
<p>
Puertorrique–o: ¿Su equipaje está listo?
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: S’ todo está ya en la estación.
</p>
<p>
(más tarde en la estación)
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: (en el despacho de billetes) ¿Cuánto cuesta un billete de ida y vuelta a Ponce? ¿Por cuánto tiempo es válido ese billete?
</p>
<p>
Empleado: Un billete cuesta trenta pesos y es bueno por diez d’as.
</p>
<p>
Suba al coche. E1 tren se pone en marcha.
</p>
<p>
Estranjero: Bueno. Aqu’ tengo un buen asiento.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Conversation One: Traveling in Puerto Rico
</i>
</b>
<br/>
characters: A foreigner
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
A Puerto Rican
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
An employee
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: Where’s the train station?
</p>
<p>
Puerto Rican: There’s one on the corner of Madera St. and Avenida del Sol and another on Bolival St. Which one do you need to go to?
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: In order to go to Ponce, I need to leave from the North Station. What time does the first train leave?
</p>
<p>
Puerto Rican: The first train leaves very early in the morning.
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: Then I’ll need to take a car to get there quickly.
</p>
<p>
Puerto Rican: Is your baggage ready?
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: Yes. Everything is already at the station.
</p>
<p>
(later at the station)
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: (At the ticket office) How much does a round trip ticket to Ponce cost? For how long is it valid?
</p>
<p>
Employee: A ticket costs thirty dollars and it’s good for ten days. Get in the car. The train is leaving.
</p>
<p>
Foreigner: Good. Here’s a good seat.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective Two
<i>
<b>
FOOD The following is a list of food vocabulary which students can use during their study of food.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
<i>
SPANISH
</i>
</td>
<td>
ENGLISH
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
comidas
</td>
<td>
meals
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
bebidas
</td>
<td>
drinks
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la sopa
</td>
<td>
soup
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pan
</td>
<td>
bread
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el agua
</td>
<td>
water
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el café
</td>
<td>
coffee
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el té
</td>
<td>
tea
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el vino
</td>
<td>
wine
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la leche
</td>
<td>
milk
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la carne
</td>
<td>
meat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el jamón
</td>
<td>
ham
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el tocino
</td>
<td>
bacon
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los huevos
</td>
<td>
eggs
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pollo
</td>
<td>
chicken
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el queso
</td>
<td>
cheese
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las frutas
</td>
<td>
fruit
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el cordero
</td>
<td>
lamb
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la carne de vaca
</td>
<td>
beef
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las costillas
</td>
<td>
ribs
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las chuletas
</td>
<td>
chops
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pescado
</td>
<td>
fish
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el desayuno
</td>
<td>
breadfast
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el almuerzo
</td>
<td>
lunch
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la comida
</td>
<td>
dinner
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la cena
</td>
<td>
supper
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el comedor
</td>
<td>
dining room
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la cocina
</td>
<td>
kitchen
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
bebo
</td>
<td>
I drink
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
como
</td>
<td>
I eat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
tomo
</td>
<td>
I take
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
me gusta (me gustan)
</td>
<td>
I like (pl.)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
dulces
</td>
<td>
sweets
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el postre
</td>
<td>
dessert
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pastel
</td>
<td>
pie
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el chocolate
</td>
<td>
chocolate
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogo segundo: A1 restaurante
</i>
</b>
<br/>
personajes: el camarero
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
el Sr. Gómez
</p>
<p>
Camarero: ¿Qué desear’a usted comer?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: No sé. Estoy mirando el menú todav’a.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: Perm’tame recomendarle un poco de arroz con pollo. El pollo está muy tierno.
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Gracias pero antes tomaré un poco de sopa.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: Bueno. El pescado está muy delicioso. ¿Qué desear’a usted para la cena?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Unas chuletas y un poco de ensalada, pan y mantequilla.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: ¿Y después?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Después tomaré los postres.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: ¿Qué prefiere usted de postre?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Deseo queso, frutas y un pastel.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: ¿Bebe usted vino en la comida?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Bebo un vaso de vino y un vaso de agua.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: ¿Tomara usted café o té después?
</p>
<p>
Sr. Gomez: Prefiero café con un poco de leche.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: Muy bien, Se–or.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogue Two: The Restaurant
</i>
</b>
<br/>
characters: Waiter
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Mr. Gomez
</p>
<p>
Waiter: What would you like to eat?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: I don’t know. I’m still looking at the menu.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: Could I suggest some chicken with rice? The chicken is very tender.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: Thank you but first I’ll have some soup.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: Very well. The fish is also very good. What would you like?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: Some chops, the salad and some bread and butter.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: And after that?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: After, I’ll have some dessert.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: What would you like for dessert?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: I’d like some cheese, fruit, and a piece of pie.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: Would you like wine with your meal?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: I’ll drink a glass of wine and a glass of water.
</p>
<p>
Waiter: Will you have tea or coffee after?
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gomez: I prefer coffee with a bit of milk.
</p>
<p>
Camarero: Very well, Sir.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective Three
<i>
<b>
SHOPPING The following is a list of general vocabulary for shopping;
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
<i>
SPANISH
</i>
</td>
<td>
ENGLISH
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
la tienda
</td>
<td>
store
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el mercado
</td>
<td>
market
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el supermercado
</td>
<td>
supermarket
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el dinero, los pesos
</td>
<td>
money
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
barato
</td>
<td>
cheap
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
caro
</td>
<td>
expensive
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
¿cuánto?
</td>
<td>
how much?
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
cuesta, vale
</td>
<td>
it costs
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la zapater’a
</td>
<td>
shoe store
</td>
</tr>
</table>
(The following is specific vocabulary for clothes shopping)
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
el traje
</td>
<td>
suit
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el abrigo
</td>
<td>
overcoat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la blusa
</td>
<td>
blouse
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la falda
</td>
<td>
skirt
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la gorra
</td>
<td>
cap
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la camisa
</td>
<td>
shirt
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el saco
</td>
<td>
coat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la chaqueta
</td>
<td>
jacket
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el chaleco
</td>
<td>
vest
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pantalón
</td>
<td>
pants
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el bolso
</td>
<td>
purse
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los guantes
</td>
<td>
gloves
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el vestido
</td>
<td>
dress
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el sombrero
</td>
<td>
hat
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la corbata
</td>
<td>
tie
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las medias
</td>
<td>
stockings
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los calcetines
</td>
<td>
socks
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los zapatos
</td>
<td>
shoes
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogo Tercero: En una tienda de departamento
</i>
</b>
<br/>
personajes: la empleada
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
la Srta. Mart’nez
</p>
<p>
Srta. Mart’nez: Deseo comprar un vestido de dos piezas para mi madre.
</p>
<p>
Empleada: ¿Qué tela prefiere usted?
</p>
<p>
Mart’nez: Una tela fina pero no muy cara.
</p>
<p>
Empleada: ¿Desea usted que la falda y la blusa hagan juego?
</p>
<p>
Mart’nez: Naturalmente. Y prefiero las dos piezas del mismo color.
</p>
<p>
Empleada: Tenemos unos vestidos de manga corta y cuello bajo que son muy elegantes.
</p>
<p>
Mart’nez: En realidad prefiero este vestido de seda con sombrero y guantes.
</p>
<p>
Empleada: Claro. Este es muy elegante y no cuesta demasiado.
</p>
<p>
Mart’nez: Muy bien. Lo tomaré. ¿Podr’a usted entregarlo a mi casa esta tarde?
</p>
<p>
Empleada: S’ sin problema, y much’simas gracias.
</p>
<p>
Dialogue Three: At the Department Store
</p>
<p>
characters: Salesgirl
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
Miss Martinez
</p>
<p>
Miss Martinez: I would like to buy a two piece dress for my mother.
</p>
<p>
Salesgirl: What kind of material would you like?
</p>
<p>
Martinez: A good material but not very expensive.
</p>
<p>
Salesgirl: Do you want the skirt and blouse to make a suit?
</p>
<p>
Martinez: Naturally. And I prefer the two pieces to be the same color.
</p>
<p>
Salesgirl: We have some dresses with short sleeves and low necklines that are very elegant.
</p>
<p>
Martinez: In reality, I would prefer that silk dress with a hat and gloves.
</p>
<p>
Salesgirl: Of course. That is very nice and it does not cost too much.
</p>
<p>
Martinez: Very good. I’ll take it. Could you send it to my house by this afternoon?
</p>
<p>
Salesgirl: Yes. No problem; and thank you very much.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
<i>
<b>
Objective Four
<i>
<b>
MEDICAL The following is a list of vocabulary for students to use when visiting the doctor.
</b>
</i>
</b>
</i>
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
<i>
SPANISH
</i>
</td>
<td>
ENGLISH
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<table border="0">
<tr>
<td>
el médico
</td>
<td>
doctor
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la consulta del medico
</td>
<td>
doctor’s office
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la enfermera
</td>
<td>
nurse
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la farmacia (botica)
</td>
<td>
pharmacy
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la receta
</td>
<td>
prescripton
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los s’ntomas
</td>
<td>
symptoms
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las p’ldoras
</td>
<td>
pills
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la medecina
</td>
<td>
medication
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la fiebre
</td>
<td>
fever
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la visita facultativa
</td>
<td>
doctor’s visit
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la urgenc’a
</td>
<td>
emergency
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pulso
</td>
<td>
pulse
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
buena cara
</td>
<td>
looking well
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
me siento bien
</td>
<td>
I feel well
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
me siento mal
</td>
<td>
I feel sick
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
me duele
</td>
<td>
my . . . hurts
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la cara
</td>
<td>
face
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los ojos
</td>
<td>
eyes
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la nariz
</td>
<td>
nose
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
las orejas
</td>
<td>
ears
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la boca
</td>
<td>
mouth
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la lengua
</td>
<td>
tongue
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
los dientes
</td>
<td>
teeth
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la cabeza
</td>
<td>
head
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el cuerpo
</td>
<td>
body
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el brazo
</td>
<td>
arm
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la mano
</td>
<td>
hand
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el estómago
</td>
<td>
stomach
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la pierna
</td>
<td>
leg
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
la rodilla
</td>
<td>
knee
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
el pie
</td>
<td>
foot
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogo Cuarto: Una Visita al Medico
</i>
</b>
<br/>
personajes: un muchacho
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
la enfermera
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
el médico
</p>
<p>
Muchacho: No me siento bien. He perdido el apetito y desear’a ver a un médico.
</p>
<p>
Entermera: Tiene dolor de cabeza o de estómago?
</p>
<p>
Muchacho: S’. Me duele mucho el estómago y un poco la cabeza.
</p>
<p>
Enfermera: Bueno. Tiene que esperar al doctor. Estará en unos minutos.
</p>
<p>
Médico: Bueno, muchacho ¿Por dónde thene dolor?
</p>
<p>
Muchacho: Tengo dolor de cabeza y dolor de estómago. Creo que los s’ntomas son graves.
</p>
<p>
Médico: No. El termómetre indica que tiene usted solo una peque–a fiebre.
</p>
<p>
Muchacho: Siento un gran dolor de cabeza y mareo.
</p>
<p>
Médico: Tome usted estas p’ldoras y se le pasara el dolor. ¿No se siente usted mejor ahora?
</p>
<p>
Muchacho: Al contrario, me siento peor.
</p>
<p>
Médico: En ese caso, env’e esta receta a la botica y tome una cucharada de la medecina cada dos horas. Si no se siente mejor, hágame el favor de volver dentro de tres d’as.
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Dialogue Four: A Visit to the Doctor
</i>
</b>
<br/>
characters: A boy
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a nurse
</p>
<p>
<font color="#ffffff" style="visibility:hidden;">
____
</font>
a doctor
</p>
<p>
Boy: I do not feel well. I have lost my appetite and I would like to see a doctor.
</p>
<p>
Nurse: Do you have a stomach ache or a head ache?
</p>
<p>
Boy: Yes. My stomach hurts a lot and my head hurts a little.
</p>
<p>
Nurse: O.K. You are going to have to wait for the doctor. He’ll be back in a few minutes.
</p>
<p>
Doctor: Well, son, where does it hurt?
</p>
<p>
Boy: I have a headache, a stomachache, and I think the symptoms are serious.
</p>
<p>
Doctor: No. The thermometer says that you only have a small (slight) fever.
</p>
<p>
Boy: Now I have a real bad head ache and I feel dizzy.
</p>
<p>
Doctor: Take these pills and your pain should go away. Don’t you feel a bit better now?
</p>
<p>
Boy: No. On the contrary. I feel worse.
</p>
<p>
Doctor: In that case, take this prescription to the pharmacy and take one spoonful of medicine every two hours. If you’re not feeling better, come back and see me in three days.
</p>
<p>
After each original dialogue, the teacher can initiate discussion about the different situations presented in the unit. The dialogues provided in this unit are by no means enough material to constitute an entire course. They are, however, a sampling of what might be covered in an oral language course. It is up to the desecration of the teacher who uses the unit to decide what material is to be covered in the class.
</p>
<p>
In addition to the dialogues in this unit, a wealth of materials is provided for loan at the Institute Office on Wall St. Among these materials is a taped cassette program which can be used to convert the classroom into a language laboratory, a box of objects which can be used to present the vocabulary for each situation orally, sample travel brochures, sample medical forms which can be filled out by the students, a sample menu from a Hispanic restaurant, and sample reference texts from which additional dialogues can be taken. These materials should provide both student and teacher with a solid oral language foundation.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Teacher Bibliography
</h2>
Briggs, Sandra, Griffith, Paul. NealeSilva, Eduardo.
<i>
Churros y Chocolate
</i>
, Glenview: Scott, Foresman and Co., 1978.
<p>
A language textbook readily available in the system which exemplifies excellent oral language teaching technique. Many good ideas, dialogues, and stories for the more advanced pupil.
</p>
<p>
Cortina, R. Diez de la.
<i>
Conversational Spanish
</i>
. Westport: Cortina Learning International, 1977.
</p>
<p>
A very useful collection of vocabulary and conversation topics arranged by situations with a special pronunciation guide. Ideal for beginners.
</p>
<p>
Navaro, Tomas.
<i>
El espanol en Puerto Rico
</i>
. San Juan: University Press, 1968.
</p>
<p>
A unique approach to the differences between Castillian Spanish and Spanish spoken in Puerto Rico.
</p>
<p>
Rosario, Ruben del.
<i>
Vocabulario de Puerto Rico
</i>
. San Juan: University Press of the State, 1959.
</p>
<p>
A vocabulary of Spanish in Puerto Rico. A bit dated, but useful for the evolution of the language.
</p>
<p>
Shapiro, Albert.
<i>
Cosas de Espana
</i>
y
<i>
de la
</i>
<i>
America Espa–ola
</i>
. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1930.
</p>
<p>
A grammatical approach to Spanish complete with a series of short stories. Good for a supplement to oral work done in this unit.
</p>
<p>
Dicionario de Provincalismos de Puerto Rico. No other information given.
</p>
<p>
A dictionary of Puerto Rican Spanish.
</p>
</body>