---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 93.03.05"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1993/3/93.03.05.x.html"
unitTitle: "Windows of the World: Family, Identity, and Socialization"
unitAuthor: "Trisha Ann Turner"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Reading, Language Arts, and Social Development, Grades 6-7"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 93.03.05:
</h4>
This unit is specifically geared toward students who are reaching their adolescence. Adolescents, as well as adults, reflect and rely on past experiences to make appropriate choices. Adults have the benefit of much more experience and hopefully a certain maturity. Adolescents do not. Therefore, the adolescent needs as many positive resources as possible to develop an understanding of their identity and how they relate to their environment; the process of self-awareness and social development.
<p>
Many factors influence the development of self-concept and self-identity. These would include cultural, and more specifically, family values. These factors influence who we are and how we relate to other people. I have chosen three plays that I feel are enjoyable to read, and relevant in dealing with these complex themes. The plays are “The Oxcart” by Rene Marques, “And the Soul Shall Dance” by Wakako Yamauchi, and “A Raisin in the Sun” by Lorraine Hansberry.
</p>
<p>
I have decided on several approaches in teaching this unit:
</p>
<blockquote>
<dl>
<dt>
1.  Students will improve in their reading skills.
<dt>
a. Teacher directed reading lessons for comprehension.
<dt>
b. Teacher directed reading lessons for vocabulary.
<dt>
2.  Students will become more self aware through dramatic activities
<dt>
a. Awareness of one’s own physical self.
<dt>
b. Awareness of other’s physical self.
<dt>
3.  Students will improve their interpersonal skills through dramatic activities.
<dt>
a. Cooperative activities building to play performance.
<dt>
4.  Students will identify thematic ideas from the plays.
<dt>
a. Family/Self
<dt>
b. Gender Roles
<dt>
c. Cultural
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</blockquote>
Teachers of other grades and other class compositions should feel free to improvise and develop techniques and approaches to meet their specific needs.
<p>
(Recommended for Reading, Language Arts, and Social Development, Grades 6-7)
</p>
</body>