---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 01.06.02"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2001/6/01.06.02.x.html"
unitTitle: "Self-Fulfilling Prophecy in African American Students: Exploring African American Achievers"
unitAuthor: "Cynthia A. Wooding"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies/Social Development, grade 5."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 01.06.02:
</h4>
<p>
In this curriculum, I have developed a unit focusing on the achievement of minorities African Americans. The curriculum discusses African Americans that have successfully contributed to their own culture and made positive changes in American and world societies. This curriculum will help build positive self-image and hope regarding intelligence in different races, genders, and socio-economic groups.
</p>
<p>
The curriculum unit focuses on the accomplishments of African American achievers during February’s black history month. The unit is to explore and familiarize fifth grade students with the history and knowledge of African American achievers. Exposing the students to achievers who share with them race, ethnic or gender profiles will allow them to explore themselves and be challenged, thus starting to create their own ideas of achievements they want to fulfill. The unit will use Robert Sternberg’s Triachic Theory when exploring famous African Americans and their accomplishments. The unit will explore African Americans who are gifted in the three aspects of Sternberg’s Triachic Theory. These three aspects are practical thinking, creative thinking, and analytical thinking. The unit will explore African Americans who have succeeded in using all or one of the thinking processes. The African American chosen to exemplify someone who succeeded in creative process will be Clementine Hunter. Clementine Hunter contributed to society with her beautiful Black American Folk art. The African American chosen to exemplify someone who succeeded in analytical process will be Benjamin Banneker. Benjamin Banneker was an inventor, scientist, and writer who contributed the design of the development of Washington D.C. and the
<i>
Farmers Scientific Almanac
</i>
. Finally, the African American who exemplifies someone who succeeded in practical processes will be Jackie Robinson. Jackie Robinson was a famous Black baseball player, businessman, and great orator who contributed morals, ethics, patience and tolerance when encountering success. These three African American display great significance to both African Americans and all culture and races. These Africans Americans will be used for exemplifying positive role models for achievement in the unit.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Social Studies/Social Development, grade 5.)
</p>
</body>