---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 01.06.08"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2001/6/01.06.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Musical Learner: Rhythms and Reading"
unitAuthor: "Doreen L. Canzanella"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Reading, grades 1-6."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 01.06.08:
</h4>
<p>
As a K-4 General Music Teacher, I educate and see a variety of intelligence and social backgrounds. I am always amazed at the inherent ability of some students to process and nurture the information given. Some students apply the information of meter and sound to other disciplines of education while others do not. So, it is the question; Is this an example of general higher intelligence or an example of Howard Gardner’s musical intelligence? Is it the naturally developed cognitive mind that is recalling and applying similar information, or a more developed part of the brain (i.e.; the musical brain) working for the student?
</p>
<p>
It is my quest to take Howard Gardner’s theory and apply it to the student that is albeit seemingly interested in education, but falling behind in reading. The crux of my exploration is how to use the natural musical interest of a student to support the regular classroom. Specifically, helping the student to focus and achieve. The process of taking turns singing or playing an instrument, rhyming words and writing a song, or learning to listen for clues in poetry/songs should reinforce their classroom experience. Hopefully in turn create a stronger, self motivated reader.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Reading, grades 1-6.)
</p>
</body>