---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 01.06.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2001/6/01.06.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Nuturing the Body and Mind in Physical Education with Mozart"
unitAuthor: "Michael Vollero"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Physical Education, grades K-6."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 01.06.07:
</h4>
<p>
Physical educators have a unique opportunity to not only nurture the body but the mind as well as by enriching the learning environment with musical sonatas created by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Scholars are continuously seeking that magical answer to make students improve their intellect. As educators, we must utilize sensible data to substantiate an imaginative proposal. Educationalists enjoy various successful teaching strategies to increase student’s intellect abilities. Some may call this questionable method called “The Mozart Effect,” to enhance learning. This study presents information that gives the reader with recent concepts and investigative studies regarding the value of music in learning. Therefore the goal of this study is to nurture the body and mind through physical activities along with background music, can motivate and educate the student simultaneously. By reviewing this study, you will be familiar with neural connections and how the brain transforms sound into electrical messages. You will also understand how specific neurotransmitters (chemical stimulus) can be cultivated through physical exercise and a musical environmental. Together with physical activities and music, educators can utilize brain related approaches that can extend instructional strategies by deciphering new learning paradigms with the mind and the human body.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Physical Education, grades K-6.)
</p>
</body>