---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 81.05.07"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1981/5/81.05.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Solar Energy"
unitAuthor: "Sherree L. Kassuba"
keywords: "Ecology Environmental Science Solar Energy Heating Cooling"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Freshman Level Physical Science and Middle and High School Environmental Biology."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 81.05.07:
</h4>
One form of energy that has been brought to the public eye is solar energy.  This is an alternative energy source that has been proved to be safe and environmentally sound.  There can be great hopes for solar energy, if energy companies and electric utilities would not promote the use of expensive energy technologies dependent on the fossil fuels and uranium they control.  And the average person would probably be more receptive to the use of solar energy if the federal government would conduct a more vigorous promotional campaign.  This unit is constructed for 9th grade science students as part of an environmental science unit.  It will be divided into several areas; general information on solar energy, advantages and disadvantages of solar energy, and different types of solar heating and cooling systems.  The unit will provide an awareness of an energy alternative that may be more a part of our lives some day.  There are three objectives for this unit.  Upon completing the unit students will: (1) be able to define solar energy, (2) explain the advantages and disadvantages of solar energy, (3) realize the potential of new careers in the solar energy field.  Included in the unit are several activities on solar energy, names of organizations and speakers to contact for further information, and experiments to test the effectiveness of solar energy.
<p>
(Recommended for Freshman Level Physical Science and Middle and High School Environmental Biology.)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Ecology Environmental Science Solar Energy Heating Cooling
</i>
</p>
</body>