---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 87.02.12"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1987/2/87.02.12.x.html"
unitTitle: "“The Oxcart” and a “Raisin in the Sun”: Romanticism, Realism, or Idealism"
unitAuthor: "Cheryl E. Merritt"
keywords: "Comparative Oxcart Marques and A Raisin In The Sun Hansberry Drama Ethnicity Literature"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for English/Literature classes, grades 7-8; and Reading/English classes, grade 6"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 87.02.12:
</h4>
This unit provides stimulating reading experiences and the opportunities to draw conclusions. Through group and individual exercises students will be given an opportunity to see what values are important to them. Students today are exposed to many religions, value systems, political ideologies, and life styles. They are being forced to make commitments. Many questions are pondered over at an early age. Where am I going? What should I strive to become? Am I ready for a commitment? Hopefully, this unit will help young people to develop a life statement of their own. Six to eight weeks is expected to effectiveness. The time can easily be adjusted for individual student and teacher needs. It is geared toward students in grades six through eight. Average, below average, as well as remedial students can benefit equally.
<p>
I chose plays above epic novels because it is much easier to individualize characters in plays, especially for students who are slow learners or remedial learners—not forgetting that dramatization is almost always enjoyable to students of all ages and levels of learning.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for English/Literature classes, grades 7-8; and Reading/English classes, grade 6)
</p>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Comparative Oxcart Marques and A Raisin In The Sun Hansberry Drama Ethnicity Literature
</i>
</p>
</body>