---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 96.02.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1996/2/96.02.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Stress, Soldiers, and Students"
unitAuthor: "John Crotty"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Integrated Math, grades 8-10"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 96.02.09:
</h4>
Studies by the American Institute of Stress show that between 75 percent and 90 percent of all visits to the doctor’s office stem from stress. The same statistics indicate that stress costs business at least $200 billion a year through absenteeism, decreased productivity, compensation claims, health insurance and medical expenses.  The main objective of this unit is to make students aware of how stress affects their lives. To accomplish this goal, the unit has three sections on stress: a review of the stress concept; the effects of stress on soldiers, especially Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD); and the effects of stress on teenage students. These sections can either be taught or given to the student to read as background information. The students will then use their knowledge of stress to make up and administer a stress test. The unit ends with the students working with the data they have collected. My students will analyze the data with a Texas Instrument TI-82. However, the lessons do not require the use of a graphing calculator.
<p>
This unit is meant to be used in conjunction with the units developed by Antonia Coughlin and Alan Frishman. Ms. Coughlin reviews the history of the Gulf War; Mr. Frishman has his class debate the Department of Defense’s handling of the existence of the Gulf War Syndrome.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Integrated Math, grades 8-10)
</p>
</body>