---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 07.03.01"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2007/3/07.03.01.x.html"
unitTitle: "Shoot for the Moon"
unitAuthor: "Larissa Giordano"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science and Language Arts, grade 2."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 07.03.01:
</h4>
<p>
The topic for this curriculum unit is the Earth-Moon system. My goal is to give students an overview of this system and describe different aspects, such as the physical characteristics of the Earth and the Moon as well as how they interact. We discuss the mythology of the Moon as well as examine the Moon as young scientists. We discuss phases of the Moon, solar and lunar eclipses and how the Moon affects the tides of the oceans, etc. A historical glimpse at how astronomers began to study the Moon and NASA's Apollo Missions is also included to inspire and motivate young scientists who may want to become astronomers or astronauts. This unit is designed to help teachers integrate astronomy within their own classroom by providing the necessary background knowledge about the Earth, its place in the solar system and the Moon. It has been designed such that it can be integrated into literacy, mathematics, science and technology classes, giving teachers the ability to integrate the subject matter within their own daily lesson plans to meet the needs of all learners while satisfying the curriculum standards of the school district. This unit is aimed at helping students think critically and solve problems, while simultaneously giving them a perspective about their place in a universe that is in constant motion.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Science and Language Arts, grade 2.)
</p>
</body>