---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 88.01.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1988/1/88.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "School Desegregation and Prejudice in the United States"
unitAuthor: "Mary Ellen Leahy"
keywords: "School Desegregation Education American History Brown Board of Education Law Supreme Court Cases America Prejudice"
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Social Studies classes, grades 6-8; American History classes, grades 6-8; and Black History classes, grades 6-8"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 88.01.03:
</h4>
<font size="-1">
<dl>
<dt>
In this unit students will learn about the nature of prejudice and about the origins of segregation in the United States. Students will learn about the history of segregation laws and the desegregation of schools in the United States. Students will learn about the nature of prejudice and racism as evidenced in the segregation laws, also called the Jim Crow laws. Students will become acquainted with the Jim Crow laws. These laws controlled and confined blacks in numerous ways. They were destructive and aggressive laws designed to push down the black people. The Jim Crow system has been on the decline since the United States Supreme Court decided Brown v. Board of Education.
<dt>
The process of the desegregation of schools began in 1954, just over thirty years ago, with the U.S. Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Brown v. Board of Education. Only after this decision did blacks begin to realize equality within our educational system. Students will learn about the major U.S. Supreme Court decisions influencing the equality of educational opportunity for blacks.
<dt>
(Recommended for Social Studies classes, grades 6-8; American History classes, grades 6-8; and Black History classes, grades 6-8)
</dt>
</dt>
</dt>
</dl>
</font>
<p>
<b>
<i>
Key Words
</i>
</b>
<br/>
</p>
<p>
<i>
School Desegregation Education American History Brown Board of Education Law Supreme Court Cases America Prejudice
</i>
</p>
</body>