---
layout: "unit"
title: "14.03.08: American Citizenship and the 14th Amendment: Conflicts and Resolutions in Education"
path: "/curriculum/units/2014/3/14.03.08.x.html"
unitTitle: "American Citizenship and the 14th Amendment: Conflicts and Resolutions in Education"
unitAuthor: "Jesus Tirado"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h3>
Contents of Curriculum Unit 14.03.08:
</h3>
<ul>
<li>
Introduction
</li>
<li>
Rationale
</li>
<li>
The Essential Questions
</li>
<li>
Background
</li>
<li>
Content Objectives and Common Core
</li>
<li>
Teaching Strategies and Lesson Plans
</li>
<li>
Resources
</li>
<li>
Annotated Bibliography
</li>
</ul>
<h3>
<a href="../../../guides/2014/3/14.03.08.x.html">
To Guide Entry
</a>
</h3>
<hr/>
<h2>
Introduction
</h2>
<p>
Teaching in New Haven puts you at many different intersections including race, law, citizenships, politics, and power if you are willing and able to take a look around.  Our students are subject to these forces and they can have a heavy impact on them.  One of my students, Lisa, told me various issues about her father, employment, and immigration status.  While he held a job and had been living in the US for several decades, the law was a barrier to his legal status in America and thus the family's economic well-being.  Since that became an issue, Lisa's academic performance has suffered this once strong honors student has seen her grades slip and decline.  Historical citizenship issues trouble my students.  Stories of slavery, Native American brutality, and discrimination weigh heavily on their minds and make deep impressions on them and their understanding of America.  Without reflection and study, this is all they see.  Students also need to learn how to research and learn how to change occurs in American through civic action and the legal system, a system that many of them are weary of.
</p>
<p>
The New Haven US History 2 curriculum starts with Reconstruction, The Westward Expansion, and Immigration.  Initially, I struggled to teach these topics because they seemed very irrelevant and disconnected to my students' daily lives and to each other.  But these subjects involved into how the law can be changed and morphed to deny freedoms.  As we go through different units, students find those who defy the law to be heroes and sympathize with them.  This includes the Civil Resisters and Native American Leaders but also the criminals featured in our class.  In a discussion of the 1920's and Prohibition, Students found Al Capone to be the most sympathetic and interesting historical character from the era.  When I asked why, my students didn't tell me that they liked anything specific about him just that defied the police and manipulated the legal system.  For this reason, I want to push my students to better understand how the legal system can also expand people's rights and freedoms.
</p>
<p>
The best and most natural content to start with is the infamous
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
ruling of 1896.  This case presents both the best and the worst of political action and reaction of the Segregation Era.   Starting with this particular case, a class can and should explore the various political ramifications of the case that start with whether or not segregation is legal and how the court came to rule that it was.  The class can also discuss the actions of Homer Plessy and the actions of normal citizens on behalf of ending Segregation in the 19
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Century.  Exploring these stories and their tragic ending will illuminate to students that history is not a simple progression of positive changes but rather a series of challenges that confront us with mixed results.  The research project will hopefully connect students with the struggle and how people organized and orchestrated change in their world.
</p>
<p>
To help students understand the issues surrounding segregation and de-segregation, we are going to focus our efforts on the issue of education.  While
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
was not an education case, the ruling had tremendous implications for education as Segregation quickly spread to schools.  Students need to understand how this case, its opinion, and its dissent created decades worth of division and conflict for all Americans.  Once the idea of "Separate but Equal" is established, the connection to segregated institutions and schools becomes clear.  Students will need to understand how the idea becomes cemented in America in order to understand the resistance.
</p>
<p>
The reason to focus around education issues helps focus students' work and because of the importance of education in our lives and history.  The resistance to Jim Crow and Segregation was strong and attacked the institutions on multiple fronts.  The unit's organization around education allows students to see how African-Americans fought for their rights.  The NAACP and the court cases provide for learning opportunities for these lessons.  Schools are also the main way that we interact with our government. With Mandatory Attendance laws in every state, schools represent a key portion of how we enact and experience our citizenship.  It makes sense then that the battle over schools, schooling, and education, became and remains one of our greatest civil rights struggles.  Looking at schools for this unit isn't just a choice of focus, it's because schools hold a supremely important place in our society.
</p>
<p>
As Common Core approaches, it brings with it new requirements and tests.  One of those is a response paper that requires students to read articles quickly and make an assessment of materials and a situation.  This means that my students will be asked to complete a project that will assess their skills in reading, writing, and judgment.  I want to give them lots of practice on how to read, research, and quickly assess materials to help them with this assessment.  Providing a strong research component to this project will help my students improve their writing and their understanding of how to communicate ideas through different materials.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Rationale
</h2>
<p>
For my unit, the focus on citizenship and education stems from wanting to provide a concrete basis for my students.  As I've worked with students in New Haven in the past 3 years and issues of citizenship and obtaining citizenship during Reconstruction, the Western Wars against Native Americans, Immigration, and current issues interest my students.  They understand how the 14th Amendment provides African-Americans with rights and citizenship but they are left at a loss understanding how the law could be bent against them and how they could so viciously excluded from the rights of citizens.  Students need to explore the court cases and people who have led the charge for America's various ethnic groups to receive the access to citizenship and their rights focusing around Education case after we discuss
<i>
Plessy
</i>
.  I want students to be able to research and experience their struggles and see them as individuals and research beyond the textbook.  Publishers and American history textbooks have excluded and overlooked countless stories of the people of North America.  Important movements become one-dimensional and often understood solely through their leaders.  Martin Luther King's story becomes the story of Civil Rights, as it happens for George Washington for the American Revolution, and Lincoln for Civil War.  Students need to discover that these movements and changes were powered by ordinary people with ordinary stories.
</p>
<p>
Going into the story beyond the figureheads is one aspect.  The other needs to be showing students that history is not predetermined.  Most students, because of class and curriculum structure, will never see that the events that shape our history are determined by a large series of factors and instead they believe that things were "fated" to happen.  This unit opens space for students to explore at least a few of those forces.  After examining the organization and orchestration that occurred during the
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
case, students will then explore their own case in a similar light.  It is important to ask students how they would vote if they had been a Justice at the time, in order for them to see how changes can occur.  Studying these changes and forces will definitely benefit students' insight into how the changes of history occur and unfold.  That is why the essential question of this unit "Was America better after
<i>
Brown v Board
</i>
?", transforms this unit into a work of social critique and not just reporting.  Students will have to rely on their own experience and ideas in order to fully examine this question.  Their research and their experience will help them assess if schools are completing their civic duty to our citizenry.
</p>
<p>
Going beyond the textbook in this regard is one of the many keys to long term learning success.  It inverts the way most students see learning occurring in the classroom by forcing them to become experts in the different issues surrounding citizenship in American History.  This will require teachers, students, and classroom to prepare themselves to work and organize around certain issues that this unit will bring up.  The questions are also intended to provide more guidance for people working with these topics to focus their students' work.  With this in mind, the four questions will aim to address at least one of the main concerns of the unit.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
The Essential Questions
</h2>
<p>
<i>
<b>
What is citizenship?
</b>
</i>
This question addresses the general topic and content area of the citizenship controversies of the different eras of American Citizenship through history.  This question can allow for more specific focus for the teachers as they explore different citizenship issues.  For issues surrounding Reconstruction, this question can evolve into how African-Americans struggled for rights and opportunities following the passage of the 13th and 14th Amendments and the subsequent repressions that followed.  Examining the different challenges and changes that occurred to citizenship during this time will provide students a dynamic view of this concept.
</p>
<p>
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
How do ideas and societies change?  My students see history as a series of events that had to happen with no other possible alternatives.  This can become problematic as they become unable to see the many powers changes or movements in history.  This question is meant to help students see that change can occur and that change does not have to be seen as a pre-destined event.  It directly applies to our topic by helping students look at the idea of how citizenship can change and can transform from being a strict and exclusionary idea as it was early in America's era.  Seeing that ideas can transform through the people's work will benefit my students tremendously.
</p>
<p>
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
How does America change?  America is definitely a nation that is constantly at change.  Who gets to participate and be involved in that change can become a meaningful question to research and assess.  This is also an extremely flexible question.  It applies to the struggles of African-Americans Post-Reconstruction just as easily as it can be applied to immigrant struggles in the 19th Century.  While this question is extremely flexible, it really gets at the heart of the conflict that this unit seeks to address.  If you aren't an American living in America, what exactly are you? Or what can you do to fix that?  My plan is to use this question to power the search for more information about these controversies and the legal cases and suits that emanate from them.
</p>
<p>
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
How do we uncover forgotten stories?   This question also applies to many different topics but pushes us to research and uncover the stories behind change in history.  This would be an opportunity for the students to connect the stories with the larger trends and forces that they will have learned about in their history classroom and from the textbook.  This question will also allow students to build different views of history and how change occurs.  I want to students to be able to see how diverse history is, and how people have impacted America as a whole.  Putting their work and research into perspective will allow students to see and recognize how communities have changed and how the people who make them up connect to the events in their textbooks.
</p>
<p>
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
Was America better after Brown v Board? This question is the most specific to the unit.  It aims squarely at the content and requires real knowledge of the systems that created and managed Segregation and the work that eventually lead to its destruction.  Students will them be asked to assess their own education.  For my school, this is an important question as well.  We are an inter-district magnet school that aims to reconcile educational gaps through diversity and art.  This question will push students to connect their own experiences with the people they are learning and reading about.  How is their education different from Brown's, Sweat's, Painter's?  Has America improved since
<i>
Brown v Board
</i>
?  This question pushes you and your students to consider education today as well as within the historical scope of the unit.
</p>
<p>
These are the questions that will guide my unit.  They are also the questions that the students will use to drive their research.  As the classroom deals with these tough issues I want to be able to turn to some guiding questions to help students muddle through these difficult materials.  Having these outlined and simple questions will allow for students to push through difficult legal texts and sources.  In the lesson plan section, I will outline the some strategies, including some alternate strategies.
</p>
<p>
<b>
</b>
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Background
</h2>
<p>
Why does citizenship matter?  For my students, citizenship does not carry much importance.  The reason is partly developmental.  These students are more self-obsessed and knowing or learning the benefits of citizenship seems too distant to matter.  The other main issue is that the classroom venues for learning about citizenship are not at all exciting or even engaging.  Students see citizenship as a given, as something that they will always as have, as a fixed good.  They also see school and the opportunities within them as given.  This, of course, ignores all the struggles and hardships that came before them.
</p>
<p>
The key to changing the students' attitudes about this topic isn't more lectures or more class. These students need a more personal connection with the material and the questions about citizenship.  Creating a research project directed towards these questions will help students understand how these cases came about and their impact on how our nation views citizenship.  It will also give students a more personal connection with the questions that our nation has faced about citizenship.
</p>
<p>
The other main benefit of this will be that it will push students to do some online research.  As schools move to the Common Core, independent work and individual drive will play a larger role in our students' success.  This means that giving students meaningful research projects to complete will also better prepare them for their future tests.  This is also a developmentally appropriate way to test and push our students.  Since they are egocentric, personal stories and epics have a better chance of connecting with them and making a lasting impression.
</p>
<p>
In my classroom, as I am sure in others, I am constantly trying to figure out ways to get students interested in the study of history and why we should study it.  History seems disconnected from their experiences and the issue persists throughout our studies.  While simulations and historical experiments have improved my students' relationship with history, there are still many barriers.  My students see history as a finite and pre-determined sequence of events and occurrences.  While no one project can break that paradigm, it is important for students to see and understand how differently events, verdicts and actions could have unfolded.
</p>
<p>
Many of my students also face difficult situations with the legal world.  Many often find the government and agents of the government as interfering with their lives and well-being.  From PPTs to 504s to DCF meetings, the government and the legal world constantly impacts them.  Many see themselves as helpless in these situations and simply try to survive the situation without much success.  Giving them some exposure to the inner working of legal world might go much further than just providing them with a better understanding of how change can occur in the US.
</p>
<p>
<b>
</b>
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Content Objectives and Common Core
</h2>
<p>
This project incorporates many Common Core goals into your classroom.  The goal behind this unit aims to get students familiar with our legal system, change from Segregation to
<i>
Brown v. Board
</i>
, and 20
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Century American History.  Students will delve into the primary sources to find the answers to their questions.  As non-fiction reading is at the heart of Common Core standards that are being adopted by several states including Connecticut this becomes a point to emphasize.  This unit strongly pushes that standard and the students as they try to become experts in their cases.  The presentations and analytical writing are also standards in the Common Core that make up the second half of this unit.
</p>
<p>
The research skills needed to complete this unit push students to new levels of thinking and growth.  Critical thinking, researching, and writing have been the focus of several studies regarding creating stronger students.  Part of making this unit a success will include the teacher monitoring and adjusting the work as necessary.  If students find the project either too easy or too hard to complete successfully, they won't learn anything from its completion.
</p>
<p>
This unit propels itself using inquiry-driven learning.  Students will be driven by the questions discussed above as they investigate their cases and write their analysis.  This means that the classroom will be investigating multiple threads based of the situation created by
<i>
Plessy v. Ferguson
</i>
.  With necessary modifications to meet students' needs and capacities, the unit can meet many standards of your content field and the Common Core.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Teaching Strategies and Lesson Plans
</h2>
<p>
The following are lessons that you might use and modify to implement the ideas in this unit.   The onus of the work needs to be on the student in order to maximize the impact on them.  Without pushing the students to do the work and the research, they won't experience the learning to the same depth and breath.  This unit belongs in a US History 2 or Civics Classroom and it questions the changing nature of American Citizenship.  These lessons focus on using the case
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
as a launching point to talk about resistance and change.  Once the class understands the points and conflicts of the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling, the class can move on to their own research projects for their court cases.  With scaffolding and help doing research, Students will see how different groups came together to attack Segregation in schools.  Once they've become experts, there will be an opportunity for them to share their expertise and there will be various options to discuss evaluation and assessments.
</p>
<p>
At the heart of this project lies teaching students how to conduct research and read and examine laws.  These are both valuable skills that have a tremendous impact on improving students' skills and how they see and interact with the world.  Especially for creating independent learning and critical thinking skills, scaffolding this assignment can really benefit your students well.  This is the heart of this unit.  Building these skills can have a serious and meaningful impact on your students.  What follows is simply a guide to thinking about how you would introduce these issues to your classroom.  If you can and wish to, you can modify them to meet the needs of your classroom.
</p>
<h3>
First Lesson
</h3>
<p>
The first lesson involves two parts: introducing students to the research project and the case of
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
.  Students need to learn the impact that the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling had on American History.  Going in depth about the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling will also help introduce the questions about power of the courts and the law.  It will also serve to bring questions about how people can organize and challenge oppression.  Allow ample time for the students to question the ruling, ponder how they would vote, and read Harlan's dissent.  Knowing the basics of this verdict influences how students will think and learn about the rest of the case.
</p>
<p>
This is also an opportunity to bring up discussions about the history of race in America.  Homer Plessy, a Louisiana Man of mixed descent, challenged the growing ideas of Segregation and Jim Crow by pushing the laws and states to their limits.  Engaging students in a discussion about what makes race or when race happens can lay a solid foundation for meaningful discussion on these issues and for this unit.  These discussions can include many resources.  You can have students read Frederick Douglas "Speech on the 4
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
of July" for historical context about race or even use the ABC Series "What Would You Do?"
<i>
Bicycle Thief
</i>
Episode.  Both of these activities will definitely instigate a lot of conversations amongst your students.  You can then outline different discussions and ask students to reflect on how race impacts us today.
</p>
<p>
After this conversation, introduce the situation of
<i>
Plessy v. Ferguson
</i>
to your students to begin their work on it.  There are a number of different avenues you can take to introduce your students to the story of this case.  Building off the previous discussions will let you jump right into Homer Plessy's legal situation.  After you discuss the facts of the case, examining the opinion will bring up many interesting questions for the students.  Some will express anger and confusion about the ruling.  When presenting the Opinion, it is important that the writings are selected to maximize student understanding.  Giving them the whole opinion would not be constructive as it would overwhelm them.
</p>
<p>
The best ways of deconstructing the opinion will depend on your students but also on how your students can read and assess what you give them.  A couple of successful strategies might include partitioning the opinion among groups or pairs of students.  From there, ask them either to summarize the opinion or pull out the 5 most important words from their selected readings.  There are of course other reading strategies you may wish to employ, but the goal here is to get students to read, think about, and understand that
<i>
Plessy v Ferguson
</i>
allowed for the idea of "Separate but Equal" to be Constitutionally sound.
</p>
<p>
Once students begin questioning how the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling can be constitutional, you can incorporate the 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment.  Distribute copies of the 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment and ask students to summarize it in their own words or pull out key phrases.  Have them publicly display their work will help them remember their work and ideas and connect to them later.  The Amendment has several important points but for the purposes of this project, make sure students understand the Equal Protection Clause and the Citizenship Clause.  Having basic understandings in these clauses will help students understand the work that they will do in their research project.
</p>
<p>
Having introduced students to the historical and political roots of racism and the Constitution's sanction of "Separate but Equal" the class needs to see how schools began to get involved.  Delving into the cultural history of Jim Crow and Segregation will illustrate how schools began to become segregated.  These segregated institutions and schools had a tremendous impact on the African American community.  If students want to delve into this history, introducing them to the debate between W. E. B. Dubois and Booker T. Washington in how some African-Americans responded to the political pressures of Segregation and Jim Crow.  Washington and Dubois were both involved in schools as well and that can bring the classroom conversation back to schools and Segregation.
</p>
<p>
The goal of lesson one is to make sure that students understand the ruling and context of the
<i>
Plessy v. Ferguson
</i>
case.  If students become angry and fed up with the racism and ignorance of the ruling, a good counter strategy might be to pass them some readings and selections from Harlan's dissent.  These readings illustrate how different people felt at the time but also how an alternative to the ruling could have changed America.  Reading the dissent will help bring students into a more positive mindset about the situations regarding the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling.
</p>
<p>
At this time, it is important to introduce students to their project.  With
<i>
Plessy
</i>
as a background, tell the students that in groups you will assign them to research a case and answer questions.  Make sure that they can have access to some kind of technology; otherwise you will need to provide all the articles for your students.  Students will need to be given structure and direct questions about how to approach their research.
</p>
<h3>
Second Lesson
</h3>
<p>
This lesson involves setting up the students' research project and preparing them to work on their own cases.  Either having access to technology or building a library of resources is going to be necessary to facilitate independent work.  The best approach you can take here is to give students specific questions to answer and research in order to help them direct their efforts.  Without any specific questions, many students will struggle to delve into the pertinent information about the cases.  The information in this lesson will focus around providing a list of cases and information for students to make sure that they can complete the project successfully.
</p>
<p>
Questions can include but are not limited to:
</p>
<p>
<i>
What is the issue at hand?
</i>
The point of this question targets and directs students to figure out what is at the heart of the case.  They will have experience with this question from their work with
<i>
Plessy
</i>
and the internet resources can provide a lot of support here.  This question is one of the most basic and will help students determine that the case is about.  Without clarifying the context of the case, building deeper understandings will become increasingly difficult and strained for the students.  You may need to provide more detailed questions like: "what is this case about?" or "what are the people arguing over?".  Making adjustments here will help your students deconstruct their case better.
</p>
<p>
<i>
How did the case come about?
</i>
Students will research the context and situation which brought these events forward.  This will allow connections to be made to the content discussed in the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling and what is being discussed in class.  As students investigate the situations around their case, ask them to make connections with what they are learning in class.  If you are in a US History classroom, looking at how the case reflects the reality of Jim Crow America and the people living in it.  Knowing what brought a case about will definitely inform students more about life during this tragic episode of American History.
<i>
</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>
Who are the people involved?
</i>
This question directs students to figure out the stories of the people who were involved in the case.  Why did they get involved?  What led them to challenge the status quo?  Students here can also be directed into researching the people behind the cases.  Where did they come from?  This question will help you access the stories behind the case.  Push students to look at who brought the arguments forward and who made the arguments and their stories.  This should bring about a better perspective on the people who made the case happen.
</p>
<p>
<i>
How does the 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment affect the case?
</i>
The 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment changes the way Americans interact with the law and can address their grievances.  Asking students to apply what they have learned about both their case and the 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment will help them piece together a more diverse view about change in America.  This question will also help them to see how the ideas behind the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling were dismantled.  Together, this question will help students connect their case with their previous work.
</p>
<p>
<i>
What is the ruling of the case?
</i>
This, of course, is one of the key ideas that students need to know in order to understand the importance and relevance of the case. Students not only need to know how the Supreme Court ruled in this case but how that impacted Americans across the nation.  This information from this question will also help students differentiate their case from the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
ruling.  They need to see how this case changed the nation and how there was still work to be done in order for more opportunity to occur.
</p>
<p>
This unit will also include the cases that you may assign to students.  Some cases will be more difficult while others are very clear and straight forward.  The Cases that are most recommended are
<i>
Sweatt v. Painter
</i>
,
<i>
McLaurin v. Oklahoma
</i>
,
<i>
Gaines v. Canada
</i>
,
<i>
Sipuel v.
</i>
<i>
Regents of the University of Oklahoma
</i>
, and
<i>
Brown v. Board
</i>
.  These cases all involve African-Americans and Schools.  If you need more cases, the first recommendation would be to look into the 4 other cases that the Supreme Court combined with
<i>
Brown v. Board
</i>
.  You can include
<i>
Gong v. Rice (1927)
</i>
which shares a geographic similarity with the above cases but involves Chinese-Americans suing to be allowed to enter the white schools.
<i>
San Antonio ISD v Rodriquez (1973)
</i>
is a more contemporary case about segregation and school funding but is after the
<i>
Brown
</i>
ruling.  The last two cases are only suggestions.  The first four are musts if you want to look at how we go from Segregation and Jim Crow to the
<i>
Brown
</i>
ruling.
</p>
<p>
The heart of this lesson is about getting students to start answering questions about their cases.  If students are feeling comfortable with their case and are able to start finding answers then the lesson has been a success.
</p>
<h3>
Third Lesson
</h3>
<p>
This lesson is all about facilitating student research and work.  There are two important things for this lesson.  The first is to make sure that students are working hard and researching their cases.  The second is to help their research progress.  The first will involve the teacher reminding students to think about the work they've done in class previous to this.  Can they use something from their
<i>
Plessy
</i>
or 14
<sup>
<sup>
th
</sup>
</sup>
Amendment work to help them understand their case more clearly?  Direct them back to that work and help them see those connections.  That will help reinforce their previous learning and give new insights.
</p>
<p>
To the second point, have some handy strategies will be useful if students become frustrated with researching their case.  Students are often not familiar with all the methods and techniques of using the internet search engines to their best capacity.  Teaching students to use Boolean terms and other such techniques will help students focus their work and their effort.  With an effort and an eye to refocus students, this research project can proceed with much greater success.
</p>
<p>
As you refocus your students, be sure to be aware of how much time they will need.  Whether they need one, two, or three class periods to research depends on your students, your school's resources, and your class schedule.  Be aware of these constraints as planning for this unit occurs.
</p>
<h3>
Fourth Lesson
</h3>
<p>
With any unit, how you finish the students' work can be just as meaningful to them as the task itself.  There are any number of ways to assess what your students have done and what is listed here is simple some ideas to complete this unit and round out their learning.   Let students know what their final work will be before you go into this unit.  While there are a number of choices, I will outline the group presentation and the written assessment that I recommend for this project.
</p>
<p>
The group presentation allows for students to share information and compare cases.  In fact, it would be beneficial to the students to prepare a handout for guided notes that allow them to write down differences and similarities between the different cases.  Having them fill out guided notes can help them practice their newly skills of sorting through cases and extracting the pertinent facts.  Students will also practice speaking in public as they rehearse and arrange their presentation.  Oral presentations are key parts of any classroom and getting students to share the information they've learned is a key skill.  With the presentation, you can wrap up with having students discuss cases that were the most similar to theirs or different.  Adjusting questions to suit your students will be the best option for your class.  During large presentations, one activity I use in my classroom is to write down summary questions on large paper all over the room.  When the presentations are done, I have the students with their notes write their answers using evidence and examples.
</p>
<p>
The last writing assessment I would do with the students is to have them write a letter to Thurgood Marshall.  Marshall was the lead attorney for the NAACP and a Supreme Court Justice.  In the letter, students will be asked to reflect upon their own educational experiences in comparison with those that they learned about in the presentations and their research.  The central question of "Was America better after
<i>
Brown v Board
</i>
?" will be addressed in this assignment.  Providing prompts and focus questions will help students direct their work and connect their research with their life experience.  Here is also where you can incorporate modern issues and a few modern readings for students who are struggling with the questions and the topic at hand.
</p>
<p>
Another way to summarize this experience would be to have all the students write their own opinion to
<i>
Brown v Board
</i>
.  Preface this activity with students having to use their own notes and their own experiences as evidence for their opinion.  This activity would best be served by lots of open-ended questions that students can answer for themselves.  In my classroom, these activities allow for a great expression and exchange for ideas.  As this unit and these lessons wrap up, this activity can provide an excellent cap for the students to reflect on what they have learned.  Working with students on these tough issues can mean that they need reflection along with assessment.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Resources
</h2>
<p>
There are many resources that one can use to help with this unit.  The first one is the great number of internet resources that are out there.  Oyez Project at IIT is a fantastic online resource for learning about the Court, the Justices, and the Rulings.  This site and others can help you download the rulings and prepare them for class and your students.  Getting your hands on the actual rulings will be useful for a variety of reasons.  To start, reading primary sources and non-fiction reading are major components of Common Core Standards.  For students, reading the cases will be meaningful learning opportunities as well.  Reading cases and becoming at least a little familiar with legal writing and the legal system would benefit several of our students.
</p>
<p>
Depending on your local resources, reaching out to a nearby law school can have tremendous benefits.  Many law schools have moot courts and can and often do make themselves available to helping with training, procedure, and even letting your students watch a performance of their moot court team.  Law schools also have many clinics where law students work with professors and other lawyers to help clients.  My own students benefited tremendously from meeting with and talking to local Yale Law students who were working in a clinic working with children's issues.  My students visited the Yale Law School.  They benefited from both the opportunity to discuss issues with students working on these issues and from a visit to the Law School.  Visits can help get your class involved in these issues and show that they go beyond the extent of a classroom.
</p>
<p>
Another resource would be to reach out to local lawyers, judges, and school officials.  Throughout my class last year, I arranged for visits from school officials and discipline officers in the school.  The visits helped illustrate the importance issues in schools and helped the students contextualize the issues.  More visits from non-school people help students connect their in-class learning to larger contexts.  Reaching out to experts around your school and outside can help students find deeper meaning for the work they are doing in class and in this unit.
</p>
<hr/>
<h2>
Annotated Bibliography
</h2>
<p>
<font size="-1">
Klarman, Michael. From Jim Crow to Civil Rights. New York: Oxford UP, 2004. Print.
<p>
This is definitely a resource for teachers to use.  Klarman's book outlines the history of the Supreme Court and its rulings from the
<i>
Plessy
</i>
Era to the Civil Rights Movement.  Klarman gives excellent background about the cases, their rulings, and their background.  For some students, selected readings will be constructive.  The whole book is definitely too much reading for students and won't benefit them at this time.  Careful selection would prove beneficial for students in some cases but that is the extent that it might prove useful for them.
</p>
<p>
Kluger, Richard. Simple Justice. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004. Print.
</p>
<p>
This is one of the great works about the
<i>
Brown v Board
</i>
case.  The book presents excellent background into the factors and actors that helped America reach the point of breaking the Segregation system.  Parts of this book will be excellent to use in class however it does require the teacher to be very selective about which parts are pulled so as to not overwhelm students.  For teachers, this is a great resource and good background and information about this monumental case in American history.
</p>
<p>
Loury, Glenn, et al. Race, Incarceration, and American Values. Boston: MIT Press, 2008. Print.
</p>
<p>
This book is based off a lecture and could be appropriate resource to help show students the importance of courts in today's world.  This book outlines today's Civil Rights battles especially as it relates to the justice system.  Loury's writing is simple and clearly illustrates how injustice continues to riddle our current system.  Several students could benefit from reading this or parts of this book particularly if they why do Civil Right matter or if Civil Rights is over.  Being able to show what change is still need or what struggles are still on-going will help students in and beyond the classroom.
</p>
<p>
Moran, Rachel, and Devon W. Carbado, eds. Race Law Stories. New York: Foundation Press, 2008. Print.
</p>
<p>
This book can be an incredible useful resource for teacher and students.  This book, a collection of essays about different cases involve race and discrimination and law, holds a great collection of information about each case.  While these essays do contain some difficult and new vocabulary for students, the writing is generally clear enough that students will be able to understand it and learn from it.  This resource can be invaluable for you and your classroom.
</p>
<p>
Ogletree, Jr., Charles. All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on the First Half-Century of Brown v. Board of Education. New York: Norton, 2005. Print.
</p>
<p>
This book is also a teacher resource.  It goes into depth about the strategies that the NAACP used to dismantle Segregation in the south.  The book also connects the work of the NAACP to the current struggles and the recent Michigan Rulings about Affirmative Action.  In this sense, this book is incredibly useful as it connects the challenges of
<i>
Brown
</i>
and
<i>
Brown II
</i>
to the modern day struggles.  This can also help you and your classroom understand the connections of these struggles for today.
</p>
<p>
Patillo Beals, Melba. Warriors Don't Cry. Abridged. New York: Simon Pulse, 1995. Print.
</p>
<p>
This is an excellent student and teacher resource for learning about Desegregation and the people who lived through it.  The book follows the live of Melba, one of the Little Rock Nine, as she faces discrimination, racism, and danger inside and outside of school.  Melba's adversities include dealing with many people upset about integration, but they also include those of the average teenage girl.  Students will relate to this book whether the whole thing or selections as Melba's voice is authentic and even includes her own diary from that time.
</p>
</font>
</p>
</body>