---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 97.04.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1997/4/97.04.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Maskerade—My Self and No Other"
unitAuthor: "Carol Ann Viccione-Luce"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Interdisciplinary, grades K-6"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 97.04.09:
</h4>
This interdisciplinary unit consists of six components: self-perception; other-perception; artists’ perceptions; revelations; deceptions; and conceptions. It combines the meanings of and attitudes toward diversity and multiculturalism and multicultural activities with the TAG curriculum. Under conceptions, students construct and embellish a three-dimensional plaster gauze mask as a visual answer to the question, “Who are you?” This personalized representation is a symbolic, metaphoric, or realistic interpretation. Each mask is an embodiment of each individual, a celebration of uniqueness, a statement of belonging. The title of this unit is derived from this activity.
<p>
Attitudes of appreciation for the diversity in one another and acceptance of all individuals is fostered. The students are introduced to literary works, art pieces, and hands-on creative activities from different cultures. Utilizing the artist’s notebook as a format for recording observations and conclusions, the students insert information on a weekly basis. This notebook becomes a written and illustrated depiction of the student and the world through his or her own eyes.
</p>
<p>
Maskerade enables the TAG 1-3 students to examine themselves, discover their strong, positive attributes, and recognize areas in need of improvement. This process of self-discovery is carefully teacher-guided with encouragement toward self-acceptance, trust in oneself, and assumptions of a right to belong and participate in the ‘community,’ in society, in life.
</p>
<p>
(Recommended for Interdisciplinary, grades K-6)
</p>
</body>